CAA and NRC not anti-Muslim, says RSS chief in Assam
GUWAHATI: The Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC are neither anti-Hindu nor anti-Muslim — they have been linked to religion only to gain political mileage, RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat said on Wednesday. “CAA and NRC have not been framed against any Indian citizen. A citizen who happens to be a Muslim won’t be a loser because of CAA,” Bhagwat said. “In post-Independence history, during the Nehru-Liaquat pact, there was an assurance that minorities would be taken care of. We are still taking care of the minorities, but Pakistan is not.”  He argued that every government across the world documents their respective country’s population profile through “NRC-like” exercises. “NRC is about information on citizens living in the country as residents. We should know the movement of those who have arrived with visas as guests and those who sneaked out without permission.” He said though the NRC exercise was not against the interest of any Indian, it was being analysed through the prism of politics. Bhagwat accused a section of people of “spinning a narrative along communal lines” around NRC and CAA. “They have made the NRC-CAA a Hindu-Muslim issue.” He harked back to Partition to trace the roots of the refugee problem that he said still haunts the country. 
Congress will not implement CAA in Kerala: Rahul
KOZHIKODE/THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi campaigned for UDF across northern Kerala on Sunday and conducted a roadshow in Kozhikode before ending his campaign at Nemom. On the last day of campaign, Gandhi took on both LDF and BJP and alleged there is a secret deal between both the fronts to bring Left back to power. “Why is the prime minister repeating his slogan Congressfree India? Why not Communist-free India or Kerala,” Rahul asked. “In every single state where BJP is not in power, Modi has used agencies like CBI or ED to topple the governments. It is mysterious that they are not doing this to the Left government here,” he said. Rahul said that the Nyay scheme would not only eradicate poverty in Kerala but create more employment opportunities and pave way for economic progress. He also said the scheme is a “Malayali solution’ for the problems faced by the people of Kerala. “Nyay is going to be implemented here once the UDF government comes to power. Kerala is going to become the first state in the country without a single poor individual as they will get Rs 72,000 a year under the project,” he said. Talking about the protest by the PSC rank holders,he said, “Why didn’t the chief minister talk to the youngsters who were protesting outside the secretariat? Why didn’t he even go to see them? It is because he knows that the only people who got jobs in Kerala are members of Left front,” Gandhi said. Earlier, speaking to a TV channel during an interview he reiterated that the party will not implement the Citizenship Amendment Act if it comes to power. Addressing a gathering later in the day at Nemom, he said the Left is not different from BJP and that it “spreads the same hatred to divide the society.” The Congress leader also touched upon T P Chandrasekharan’s murder and said no Congress worker would have done such an act as it is not the party’s tradition. Gandhi blamed BJP for ruining the country’s economy as well. Speaking about fuel price, demonetization, GST, and the imposition of lockdown in a short notice, Gandhi asked how BJP can ask for the votes of people after doing all this. 
Right to protest can't be anytime, everywhere: SC junks Shaheen Bagh review plea
NEW DELHI: “The right to protest cannot be anytime and everywhere”, the Supreme Court said as it dismissed a plea seeking review of its verdict passed last year in which it had held the occupation of public ways during the anti-CAA protests at Shaheen Bagh here was “not acceptable” The top court said there may be some spontaneous protests but in case of prolonged dissent or protest, there cannot be continued occupation of public place affecting the rights of others. A bench of Justices Sanjay Kishan Kaul, Aniruddha Bose and Kirshna Murari said, “We have perused the review petition and record of the civil appeal and are convinced that the order of which review has been sought, does not suffer from any error apparent warranting its reconsideration”. The bench, which has passed the order recently, said it has considered the earlier judicial pronouncements and recorded its opinion that “the Constitutional scheme comes with a right to protest and express dissent but with an obligation to have certain duties”. “The right to protest cannot be anytime and everywhere. There may be some spontaneous protests but in case of prolonged dissent or protest, there cannot be continued occupation of public place affecting rights of others”, the bench said, while dismissing a plea by one Shaheen Bagh resident Kaniz Fatima and others seeking review of last year's verdict of October 7. The top court, which considered the matter in the judges' chambers also rejected the prayer for open court hearing in the matter. The apex court had on October 7, last year held that public spaces cannot be occupied indefinitely and demonstrations expressing dissent have to be in designated places alone. It had said occupation of public ways in the anti-CAA protests at Shaheen Bagh locality here was “not acceptable”. Observing that democracy and dissent “go hand in hand”, the apex court had said constitutional scheme comes with the right to protest and express dissent, but with an obligation towards certain duties. It had said the mode and manner of dissent against colonial rule during India's freedom struggle cannot be equated with dissent in a self-ruled democracy. “However, while appreciating the existence of the right to peaceful protest against a legislation...we have to make it unequivocally clear that public ways and public spaces cannot be occupied in such a manner and that too indefinitely,” the top court had said. The apex court's verdict had come on a plea by lawyer Amit Sahni against blockade of a road in Shaheen Bagh area by those protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), which aimed to provide Indian citizenship to persecuted minorities of Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. It had held that the protest at Shaheen Bagh was a blockage of a public way which caused grave inconvenience to commuters. The top court had said such kind of occupation of public ways, whether at the site in question or anywhere else for protests, is not acceptable and “the administration ought to take action to keep the areas clear of encroachments or obstructions”. “Democracy and dissent go hand in hand, but then the demonstrations expressing dissent have to be in designated places alone,” it had said, adding, “We cannot accept the plea of the applicants that an indeterminable number of people can assemble whenever they choose to protest”. Restrictions were imposed on the Kaindi Kunj-Shaheen Bagh stretch and the Okhla underpass, which were closed on December 15, 2019 due to the protests. Later, due to Covid-19 pandemic, the area was cleared. Watch 'Right to protest cannot be anytime and everywhere': SC dismisses review of Shaheen Bagh verdict
Will pass resolutions against CAA, farm laws: Tamil Nadu CM M K Stalin
CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu chief minister M K Stalin on Tuesday announced that the state assembly would pass resolutions against the Union government’s contentious farm laws and the Citizen Amendment Act (CAA) in the upcoming budget session. Responding to the appeal made by Manamadurai MLA A Tamilarasi to pass resolutions against the farm laws, Stalin said the DMK had registered its strong protest against the farm laws on several occasions. The party has been demanding that the Union government revoke the Acts, which were against the interest of the farming community. “This government has taken a clear stand to pass a ‘unanimous resolution’ against the farm laws to reflect the sentiments of the farmers across the country. There is no change in it,” Stalin informed the 234-member assembly, which has four MLAs from the BJP. Since the present session was meant for debate over the governor’s speech, it would not be appropriate to pass such a resolution now. It would be against the protocol, he said. “So, a resolution against the farm laws will be passed in the upcoming budget session. It will be done to register the Tamil Nadu government’s protest against the Union government’s farm laws,” said the CM. He added that the assembly would pass a resolution against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act on the occasion. The act was against the interest of minorities across the country. It created panic among the minorities Papanasam MLA M H Jawahirullah welcomed the CM’s announcement and thanked him. 
Don’t politicise it, says Shah, questions CM’s ‘silence’ on Rajbanshi boy’s death
Shantipur (Nadia): Accusing chief minister Mamata Banerjee of attempting to “politicise” the Sitalkuchi deaths, Union home minister Amit Shah on Sunday told her that it was her “gherao CRPF” comment that was responsible. He also responded to her call for resignation, saying he was ready to do so “if people in Bengal ask him to”, but it would be Banerjee herself who would have to put in her papers, come May 2. “The incident is being politicised,” Shah said while speaking to reporters after a road show at Shantipur, Nadia. “I have seen Mamata Didi’s statement.... A few days back, at a rally, she asked people to gherao CISF and CAPF units. She asked people to attack them. I want to ask her, ‘Wasn’t your statement responsible for the death of the four persons?’” Shah, expressing grief over the “unfortunate death”, said: “Had she not spoken like that, could they have mustered the courage to attack the jawans? She should apologise for her statement.” Shah also accused the Trinamool of leaving out the name of Ananda Burman, while paying homage to the deceased, as the youth, a Rajbanshi, was “not from her vote-bank”. The 18-year-old Burman, a first-time voter, was the first victim of poll violence in Sitalkuchi on Saturday morning. “Mamata Didi never took Burman’s name, who died that very morning. Every death is sad, and she should have expressed grief over Burman’s death too. Burman was killed in front of the same booth when the goons wanted to stop polling in that booth,” said Shah. “She never paid homage because Burman does not represent her vote bank. This is not Bengal’s political culture.” Trinamool Congress later said the CM referred to all five deaths and the plaque where she paid homage on Sunday bore all five names, not four. The Election Commission had served a notice to Banerjee on her comment about central forces, to which she had replied. The EC’s notice was based on the state chief electoral officer’s report and authorised transcripts of a speech Banerjee delivered in Cooch Behar on April 7, where she is heard telling women voters to “restrain (gherao) CAPF (personnel) if they create disturbances”. Later, at a rally in Basirhat, Shah said Banerjee was asking for his resignation. “If the people of West Bengal demand that I put down my papers, I am ready to do so with my head bowed. I would like to remind her that on May 2, she will have to tender her resignation to the governor. Mamata Didi is not a small leader. She is known across the country. After she resigns to the governor, her farewell will also be an elaborate one,” he said, adding that the BJP would win 200 seats across Bengal. Shah also alleged that she was opposing the Citizenship (Amendment) Act “to appease illegal immigrants” who, he claimed, took the benefits of welfare schemes but indulged in riots. 
Gadkari takes on Cong for its guarantee to nullify CAA in Assam if voted to power
DHARMAPUR/GOLAKGANJ/GUWHATI (ASSAM): Senior BJP leader Nitin Gadkari on Friday lashed out at the Congress for its "guarantee" to the people of Assam of bringing in a legislation in the state assembly to nullify the Citizenship (Amendment) Act if voted to power in the state. The union road transport minister said Congress is engaged in opportunistic vote bank politics and has compromised the country's security by its minority appeasement. Without taking any name, he said some people and some party have supported infiltration in Assam and tried to give the infiltrators voting rights, which is not beneficial for the country.  BJP's political agenda on the other hand is development, unity and security of the country and the party is fully committed to it, he said addressing poll rallies at Dharmapur and Golakganj and at a press conference here. "The CAA is a central law. No one can change it in an Assembly. Rahul Gandhi does not know that or what?" he said. Gadkari's comment follows the one by BJP national president J P Nadda, who while releasing the party's Assam poll manifesto earlier this week had said CAA had been passed by Parliament and would be implemented in the country. It had trigerred state-wide protests by political parties and the All Assam Students Union, which had been in the forefront of the 2019 agitation against CAA. Congress in its "Five guarantees" to Assam promised that would nullify CAA in Assam by bringing in a legislation in the state assembly, besides providing five lakh government jobs to youths in five years, 200 units of free electricity for every household, increasing the daily wages of the tea garden workers to Rs 365 and Rs 2000 per month to homemakers if voted to power. Gadkari said, "This is a very important election. It is not to decide the future of Congress, but to decide the future of Assam. The BJP government did more work in the state in five years than what Congress did in 50 years. "The difference between BJP and Congress is that the opposition party does opportunistic vote bank politics and has surrendered the country's security for the sake of its appeasement politics. To appease the minorities, Congress is playing with the nation's security," Gadkari said. The union minister listed a host of projects that his ministry has implemented in the state and the north east. He said Assam will be one of the top states in India if BJP returns to power in the state. "During our tenure, road work of 30,000 crore have been completed in Assam. Sanctions for another Rs 50,000 crore for roads have been given. At present, work for Rs 35,000 crore is on. Assam will have completed roads of Rs two lakh crore in the next five years," he added. Besides, the Centre has approved Rs 1,300 crore bamboo mission and other industries like an ethanol plant for the state. He said the north east region will be developed as a manufacturing hub for incense sticks made of bamboo, besides creating waterways to connect the region with South East Asia. The government is at present developing a Rs 1,200 crore multi-modal logistic park spread across 317 acres at Jogighopa, which will create huge job opportunities. "What chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal and (Assam minister Chandra Mohan) Patowary did for Assam in the last five years it was just a trailer. The actual film is yet to start," he added. 
BJP’s polarising tactics will not work in Assam: Sitaram Yechury
GUWAHATI: CPM general secretary Sitaram Yechury has said that ‘binary’ tactics of polarizing Hindus and Muslims won’t work in the Assam election. Yechury was confident of a Congress-led Mahajot government in the state as he addressed the media here on Sunday after concluding a tour of Sarbhog constituency, which the Left party is trying hard to get back from the BJP. “The BJP calculation is simply wrong. In Assam, all Muslims and Hindus are not on two opposite poles. Out of the 20 lakh people, who were left out of the National Register of Citizens (NRC), the majority were Hindus. Why has there been no solution to it in the last two years? They (BJP) survive only in creating binaries between Hindus-Muslims,” Yechury said. The CPM has fielded candidates in two seats. In Sarbhog, represented by BJP’s state president Ranjeet Kumar Dass, Yechury said the Left party has a high chance of winning. He said even the Hindus are going against the BJP and its allies. “The bulk of our Mahajot supporters who came to our rally in Sarbhog yesterday were Assamese Hindus. They are not part of this polarization,” Yechury added. He also took a jibe at Assam BJP president Dass, who preferred the Patacharkuchi seat over Sarbhog this election. The CPM general secretary alleged that this move by Dass was taken after the saffron party sniffed defeat in the lower Assam seat that was a Left bastion for long, represented by veteran communist leader Hemen Das multiple times and later by Uddhab Barman. While the BJP has been criticizing the Left for going in an alliance with the Congress in Assam, and fighting each other in Kerala, Yechury replied that there is no contradictory stand between the Congress and the Left so far as resisting the BJP is concerned. “The Congress is against us only in Kerala. It’s only in one state where the poll battle continues between the Congress-led alliance and CPM-led front for the last 50-70 years. The BJP is not in the scene there,” the Left leader asserted. Instead, Yechury accused the BJP of hoodwinking voters in different parts of the country with contradictory stands on the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. “According to their opportunism, the BJP supports CAA somewhere (West Bengal), but says won’t implement the law in another state (Tamil Nadu). But the implementation of CAA and the Assam Accord cannot go together in Assam. They should keep this in mind,” he added. Yechury also questioned the neutrality of the EC, after the poll panel reduced the campaign ban on BJP minister and candidate from Jalukbari, Himanta Biswa Sarma, by 24 hours. He said that the EC should have disqualified Himanta from contesting the polls, for the threat of putting BPF chief Hagrama Mohilary in jail for his alleged links with insurgents. “A 48-hour ban from campaigning was reduced to 24 hours by EC, which should not have happened. The faith of the people in EC’s neutrality is an essential requirement for the health of democracy,” Yechury said. 
Anti-CAA group stages protest in Jorhat
JORHAT: Activists of CAA Birudhi Oikya Mancha, Jorhat, staged a protest on Wednesday demanding that the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) be repealed. The organization said they would continue with their protests unless their demands are met. Activists of the organization — formed this year in upper Assam’s Jorhat district — staged a dharna in front of the Jorhat deputy commissioner’s office for about an hour from 11 am on Wednesday. President of the organization Niranjan Mahanta said, “We have taken up our protest programme today (Wednesday) to demand repealing of CAA at the earliest as this act is a threat to the identity of indigenous people in Assam. We have also demanded the release of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti adviser Akhil Gogoi.” 
Hundreds of students hit Guwahati streets demanding scrapping of legislation
GUWAHATI: Hundreds of students hit the streets of Guwahati on Friday demanding the scrapping of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). Former general secretary of the Cotton University, Pranjal Kalita, said the students’ fraternity cannot forget the atrocities meted out by Assam Police on them and the people of Assam during anti-CAA protests. “We are always with the people of the state. We won’t accept the act that poses a threat to the indigenous people. It is not possible to stay silent and let the greater Assamese community go into extinction.” Saying that protests will go on until the act is scrapped, he added, “The Covid-19 pandemic has definitely put a break in the protests, but it is not the end. We have resumed all sorts of agitations from today. The ethnic organizations, too, have also resumed their protests.” He urged the people to stay united at this time of crisis where an uncertain future is looming large over the community. Last year’s protests over the CAA that started from Cotton University on December 11 had grabbed headlines all over the country. The rally had seen participation of students from Gauhati University, Handique Girls’ College, Assam Textile Institute at Ambari, Guwahati College, Guwahati Commerce College, Assam Engineering Institute, B Borooah College, Arya Vidyapeeth College and Pragjyotish College. When the students were marching through the Guwahati-Shillong road, police personnel tried to stop them and even resorted to lathicharging at the Ulubari area. However, they failed and the students continued with their march. The rally moved ahead and was joined by the students of SB Deorah College and other private educational institutions. A huge number of police personnel were immediately deployed at Bhangagarh area. Barricades were put up, but that, too, couldn’t stop the rally which moved towards Dispur. Slogans against the act and the government could be heard clearly and loudly on GS Road that day. Later, the students of Dispur College and the Dispur Law College joined the rally at Ganeshguri. It is during this protest that five youths – Sam Stafford (17), Abdul Amin (23), Ishwar Nayak (25), Deepanjal Das (19) and Dwijendra Panging — died when security personnel opened fire to disperse the crowds. “We cannot let their sacrifices go in vain. The government must withdraw the act and recognize the sacrifices,” Pranjal said. The students, who gathered on the bank of the Dighalipukhuri on Friday, also lit earthen lights in memory of the martyred youths. 
Hathras cremation rerun of what we faced: Kin of CAA protesters
MEERUT: Hushed up, hurried and with little that can pass for consent, bodies of those who die in periods of unrest are often marked for “quick disposal”. Families of those who died during the CAA and Dalit protests in the state say the Hathras case is a reminder of what they went through — a grave loss, followed by pressure from the police and administration, and, finally, a forced burial. Police insist this is done to prevent a “volatile situation” from getting out of hand. On December 20 last year, Noor Mohammad was on his way from a medicine store in Muzaffarnagar when he was shot in the head. It was the second day of the countrywide anti-Citizenship Amendment Act protests and counter-protests in support of the amended law, clashes had broken out and police had stormed Muzaffarnagar. Noor, 26, was caught in the crossfire. “We were handed the body and asked to bury him at Daurala in Meerut right then. We wanted to bring him home. But police said we would have to give in writing that should there be a law and order problem because of this, we’d be responsible,” said Mohd Manshad, Noor’s 55-year-old uncle. They relented and Noor’s body was buried that night. Official records show 22 protesters had been killed in the violence that unfolded in response to the CAA and the crackdown on protests. Suleiman was a 20-year-old in Bijnor, also out on December 20, a Friday, to offer namaaz. Police had later admitted in a TV interview that he had been shot by a cop “in self-defence”. The case, like the body, was buried quickly. “Some neighbours told us Suleiman had been shot. When we got there, he was still alive. He died by the time we reached the hospital,” Munsaf Malik, his 46-year-old cousin, said. That night, the family was handed the body but with riders. “Senior police officers forced us to not take the body back home to Nahtaur. Late that night, he was buried in Bagdad Ansar. It was hushed up,” Malik added. Senior police and administration officials did not deny the pattern but attributed it to an anticipation of escalating “tension”. Meerut SSP Ajay Sahni said they always “persuade” but don’t force anyone. “On several occasions, citing law and order, we request families to cremate early, but this is not done without their consent,” he said, adding, “If they resist, we try and persuade them with help from local politicians.” “Sometimes, we receive information that handing over the body might politicise the matter. It might get worse. That is where the local administration intervenes and oversees the cremation or burial,” said a senior police official who did not want to be named. But the “intervention”, families said, often turns into blatant threats. On April 2, 2018, when Dalit-led protests against the dilution of the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act were raging across the country, Ankur Jatav was shot in Meerut. The 25-year-old protester succumbed to injuries later. “His body was first moved from a Meerut hospital to Ghaziabad when his condition deteriorated. We were told he has been referred to a higher centre in Delhi,” said Gyanendra Kumar Gautam, a family member. When he died, a team led by the sub divisional magistrate and circle officer visited the family. “They convinced us not to bring the body home. They said they would not register an FIR of his death if we did not agree,” Gautam added. The next morning, some members of the family were escorted to the hospital in Ghaziabad where Ankur had died and then to the postmortem house. “We were taken straight to Brajghat (cremation grounds), where the police had already prepared everything. The last rites were hurriedly performed without proper rituals or permission.” No one has been arrested for any of the three deaths. 
