SC Bars UP Govt From Acting on Earlier Notices to Anti-CAA 'Protesters' for Damages
The apex court also, however, said that the state can take action as per new rules, ostensibly the one it introduced in March this year.
CommunalismGovernmentLawRights09/Jul/2021New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Friday, July 9, asked the Uttar Pradesh government not to take action on earlier notices sent to protesters who had agitated against the Citizenship Amendment Act to recover alleged losses from public property damage caused during the protests.
The apex court also, however, said that the state can take action as per the law and in accordance with new rules.
A bench of Justices D.Y. Chandrachud and M.R. Shah said, “Don’t take action as per the earlier notices. All action should be taken in accordance with new rules.”
The government had threatened to recover alleged losses from property damage from those it had identified as culpable protesters in late 2019, during the thick of the anti-CAA protests that also saw heavy police action against agitators. The Wire had then reported how the move did not stand to legal scrutiny.
By the end of December 2019, administrations of four districts issued notices to over 130 people accused of rioting to pay up around Rs 50 lakh in damages.
Then, the Uttar Pradesh assembly in March 2021 passed a Uttar Pradesh Recovery of Damages to Public and Private Property Bill, 2021. Under the law, protesters found guilty of damaging government or private properties will face imprisonment of one year or a fine ranging from Rs 5,000 to Rs 1 lakh.
Senior additional advocate general Garima Prashad, appearing for Uttar Pradesh, said the state has proceeded since the last date of hearing and has constituted tribunals and framed all the requisite rules.
Also read: In UP, Modi Follows Up on Yogi Govt’s Attempts to Shift Focus to Destruction of Property
The bench asked Prasad to file a counter affidavit providing details of rules and tribunals constituted and posted the matter for further hearing after two weeks.
The top court was hearing a plea filed by Parwaiz Arif Titu seeking that notices sent to alleged protesters by district administration be quashed and asked the state to respond to it.
The plea has alleged that such notices have been sent in an “arbitrary manner” and one was given against a person who had died six years ago at the age of 94. Several others, including two people who are aged above 90, have received such notices.
On January 31 last year, the top court had issued notice to the state government and asked it to respond to the plea.
Titu had contended that these notices were based on an Allahabad high court judgement delivered in 2010 which “is in violation of the guidelines” laid down by the top court in a 2009 verdict, and re-affirmed in a 2018 order.
He submitted that the state government has appointed additional district magistrate to deal with the process of notices for recovering damages for loss of public property during protests against the CAA whereas the guidelines laid down by the apex court stipulated that retired judges should deal with the matter.
The plea has sought stay on these notices claiming they have been sent to persons who have not been booked under any penal provisions and no details of FIR or any criminal offences have been made out against them.
“The contradiction is that while the Supreme Court in 2009 put the onus of assessment of damages and recovery from the accused on high courts of every state, whereas the Allahabad High Court had issued guidelines in 2010 judgement that let the state government undertake these processes to recover damages, which has serious implications,” said the plea, filed through advocate Nilofar Khan.
Also read: In Bijnor, Children Give Harrowing Accounts of Beating by UP Police After CAA Protest
“The judicial oversight/judicial security is a sort of safety mechanism against arbitrary action. This means that there is every chance that the ruling party in the state could go after its political opponents or others oppose to it to settle scores,” it said.
It also sought a direction to the Uttar Pradesh government to follow the procedure as per the 2009 and 2018 guidelines of the apex court while claiming damages to recover the losses caused to public property during such protests.
The plea sought setting up of an independent judicial inquiry to probe into the incidents which happened during the protests against the amended citizenship act and the National Register of Citizens in Uttar Pradesh, as has been done by the Karnataka High Court.
It claimed that the BJP-led Adityanath government in Uttar Pradesh is “moving ahead on the chief minister’s promise of avenging loss to public property” by seizing assets of protestors in order to “take revenge for political reasons from one community who is in minority”.
The plea further alleged that around 925 people, who have been arrested so far in connection with the violent protests, may not get bail easily in Uttar Pradesh till they pay up for the losses as they have to be given “conditional bail” only after they deposit the amount.
“The government of Uttar Pradesh and its administration and police are no longer behaving like the arm of a democratic government as it cracked down on protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019/NRC. The police on the instructions of the Uttar Pradesh administration used disproportionate force and denied public accountability,” it alleged.
(With PTI inputs)

To Prevent Democracy's Erosion, India Must First Redefine Its Meaning
Democracy is not defined by the timely conduct of elections alone. This is merely a pre-condition for democracy.
GovernmentPoliticsRights24/Jun/2021Indian politics and its vocabulary have changed significantly over the last decade or so. Rather, it has got re-defined. More so, in the last seven years (2014–2021) under the prime ministership of Narendra Modi. One development, among other things, distinctly stands out in this regard. It is the systematic, blatant and unprecedented erosion of democracy as captured empirically by reputed global institutes Freedom House and V-Dem which have described Indian democracy as “partially free” and an “electoral autocracy”, respectively.
The enactment of the religious-centric Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 (CAA) despite secularism being part of the basic structure of the constitution, frequent invocation of sedition law (Section 124A of IPC) against political dissent when freedom of speech and expression is a fundamental right, the face-off between Centre and West Bengal government over the transfer of an IAS officer when federalism has been read into the constitution are some examples which expose the deep fault lines of democracy in India. More so, the failure of the institutions to provide safeguards against the misuse of laws and procedures, and to check the rising populism.
Also read: India Is No Longer a Democracy but an ‘Electoral Autocracy’: Swedish Institute
The above developments raise some serious questions about democracy in India. Is democracy in India so fragile that when faced with populism and authoritarianism it would crumble? Or has it been so since the beginning, and it has only now come to the fore in the face of an existential threat?
Changing the rule of the game 
To begin with, at a popular level, the rule of the game for democracy has been simply inverted by way of propaganda and narrative, and the legal sleight of hand. It is argued by the supporters of the Modi regime that because India has timely elections (electoral democracy), therefore, it is automatically a democracy, and it consequently means support of the majority. This understanding of democracy, however, is far from the truth, if not sinister.
Moreover, the concerted secrecy around electoral bonds and the callous judicial response to it have further served a blow to democracy, thereby making it just symbolic sans any substance.
‘Democracy’ and ‘electoral democracy’ are not fungible, let alone the same thing. Rather, as Ornit Shani puts it in her book How India Became Democracy: Citizenship and the Making of the Universal Franchise, ‘electoral democracy’ is a “pre-condition for democracy”. But despite two general elections in 2014 and 2019, based on ‘universal adult franchise’, which propped up Narendra Modi as prime minister, democracy is in a bad health in India.
The ‘interlude’ called Emergency
The apologist of the Modi regime often invokes Indira Gandhi’s declared Emergency of 1975–77, when faced with the ongoing erosion of democracy in India. True, what she did stands as an ignominious example and was an aberration in the trajectory of democracy in India.
However, what is happening now, in comparison to 1975–77, is extremely concerning. In 1975–77, democracy was made a laughing stock by way of a declared Emergency. And after 21 months, it was lifted and was followed by a general election. This, however, is not the case now. The erosion of democracy is happening systematically sans any declared Emergency for the last seven years, without knowing when it would halt.
Explaining the two democratic crises, Suhas Palsikar, political scientist, writes “the past practice of sub-democratic politics [Emergency] makes it difficult for citizens to distinguish between a difference in degree (the past) and a difference in kind (the present). The motif of the state confuses the citizens and it becomes difficult for them to differentiate between the small temptations of the power holders to cut corners and a grand design to reshape the polity.”
Former Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi. Photo: PTI
Democracy sans liberalism 
Democracy, in its most basic sense, can be described as a form of government enjoying the support of a majority. But it needs to be kept in mind that in the absence of any checks or safeguards, this democracy, as J.S. Mill notes in On Liberty can turn out to be “tyranny of majority”. Therefore, rule of law, freedom of speech and expression, individual dignity, minority rights, etc, provide the required safeguards against democracy becoming majoritarianism. In fact, they form the cornerstone of democracy.
So, democracy sans liberalism always stands vulnerable. Therefore liberal democracy is what can save democracy from becoming a Frankstenian monster. Also without the necessary liberal safeguards, as the ongoing crisis of democracy shows, democracy can be hollowed without even suspending it, like the emergency of 1975-77.
Though India, post-independence, adopted the democratic form of government, was it really democratic with the adequate liberalism required to sustain it? The Indian national movement followed by constituent assembly debates, which culminated into the constitution, doesn’t present a very strong case for liberal democracy.
The Indian national movement since its inception had a very specific objective – getting freedom from the colonial power. Given that the national movement was a mass movement, democracy and secularism became indispensable. Though in the course of the national movement, demands for fundamental rights in the Nehru Report (1928) and civil liberties in the Karachi Resolution (1931) were made, they were never the dominant current. A separate and standalone civil rights movement was never seen in India either before or after independence.
This, however, is in sharp contrast to what we observe in the US, where there is a rich history of civil rights movements. Even as late as the 1960s, a civil rights movement was led by African-Americans for their civil and political rights. And this is perhaps one of the reasons what makes the US, among other things, a strong and successful democracy.
Martin Luther King and other civil rights movement leaders in front of the statue of Abraham Lincoln, August 28, 1963. Photo: Rowland Scherman, US National Archives and Records Administration/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain
Even the constituent assembly did not expend much time and words on engaging with liberalism. The word “liberal” is just used once in the entire constitution. The constitution proclaims itself to be liberal, but it didn’t describe it to be so categorically. On this Sudhir Krishnaswamy, constitutional scholar, writes, “[T]hat the framers of the Constitution actively avoided describing their efforts to be directed towards a liberal Constitution.”
Post-independence, though it was expected that the Supreme Court would read liberalism into the constitution through its interpretation and further enhance it, however, it has failed in the face of a strong state despite the apex court making such efforts. The history of the First Amendment (1951), whereby two progressive judgments upholding free speech were diluted by way of an amendment is the best example to understand the response of a static state and a helpless judiciary towards civil liberties. Often the bogey of “public order” and “national security” has been invoked to curtail civil liberties.
Also read: Watch Out Democratic India, Unhappier Days Are Just Around the Corner
Populism has always been a defining feature of Indian politics, although its degree can be debated. Populism, as a political concept, represents the “will of the people”, and the populist banks on the disenchantment of the majority while paying scant regard to democratic norms. That populism is antithetical to liberal democracy is axiomatic. In this regard, professor Anna Cento Bull, University of Bath, observes that populist leaders “dislike the “complicated democratic systems” and “makes the decision in a way that just isn’t possible in traditional democracies”.
In India, the politics of 1970 and hence marks the period of populism. The project of liberalism – expected to be safeguarded by the Indian state – fell on the back burner. While post-1990, with the introduction of a neoliberal economic order, the citizens, who were thought and excepted to be the sentinel of democracy have become consumerist and privatised.
Re–defining democracy 
If one examines the trajectory of democracy in India, it shows a distressing state of affairs. It is the same democratic project about which Pratap Bhanu Mehta in The Burden of Democracy glowingly wrote that “it was a leap of faith for which there was no precedent in human history”. And today, it is the same democracy which is sadly gasping for breath. On a proper prognosis of democracy in India, bringing it on the ventilator would show that it was not predicated on liberalism. Institutions, which were mandated with the dual task of defending and deepening democracy have failed miserably.
Still, it is not too late to contain the crisis of democracy in India. Ousting of authoritarians like Donald Trump from office reinforces hope. However, for this to happen in India, democracy needs to be re-defined in line with the best practices of liberalism in its true sense. Up until now, the bottom-down approach of deepening democracy has to give way to top-up ‘social revolution’. Investment in democracy by the social groups needs to be made and democracy must be guarded jealously.
Ambedkar’s talisman of constitutional morality, wherein he exhorts commitment to “permanent reverence to the form of the constitution”, can be a lodestar in rescuing democracy from the clutches of authoritarianism, followed by moulding it in a liberal cast. And, indeed, the process of “instilling democracy” on Indian soil should never stop until it reaches the crevices of society and becomes a ‘way of life’.
Md Zeeshan Ahmad is a law graduate from Aligarh Muslim University.

The Hypocrisy and Opportunism of the RSS's 'Outreach' to Muslims
The Sangh parivar is known for its trenchant support to the idea of 'Hindu Rashtra' and for relentlessly demonising Muslims. Mohan Bhagwat has never in the past seven years spoken up against vigilantes involved in lynchings. So what has changed now?
CommunalismPolitics11/Jul/2021Last week, the Indian Express published two news stories side by side. The headline of the first one quotes Suraj Pal Singh Amu, the Haryana BJP spokesperson and Karni Sena chief as saying: “If you want to make history, Taimur, Aurangjeb, Babur won’t be born.” The other headline was in total contrast to what Amu says. It quotes Mohan Bhagwat, the RSS chief, as saying: “If a Hindu says that no Muslim should live here, that person is not Hindu.”
Amu is known for his communal bigotry and rabble rousing statements like the death threats to actor Deepika Padukone for her part in the movie, Padmavati which was later renamed as Padmaavat, and such statements can be expected from him especially when he has de facto state protection.
However, the statement of Mohan Bhagwat was surprising. He goes on to say: “Those who are indulging in lynching are going against Hindutva. Law should take its own course against them without any partiality.”
The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, or RSS, the parent organisation of the Bharatiya Janata Party, is not exactly known for advancing the cause of communal harmony. Many of its members are known for their trenchant support to the idea of “Hindu Rashtra”. They regularly demonise minorities, especially Muslims, on various counts including their eating habits and, lately, with the made-up theory of “love jihad”.
I have first-hand experience of the Sangh’s myopic thought process after interacting with one of its subsidiaries (to which I was invited to give a presentation on border management), which was supposedly aimed at identifying the problems of the border population but was actually more interested in their religious profiling.
The RSS is trenchantly an anti-minority organisation. People belonging to this organisation have not only been making anti-minority statements but many also openly advocate violence against them. The hate speeches by Amu and the Jamia shooter are thee before us. Several reports suggest that Hindutva activists  were involved in fomenting the Northeast Delhi riots of 2020. However, the RSS and Bhagwat have maintained a stoic silence about several instances of atrocities against Muslims.
The RSS has never in the past seven years spoken a word against cow vigilantes involved in the lynching of Muslims for something as common as transporting cows from one place to another. The adverse effect on the social fabric of the country is for everyone to see. The amount of hatred towards Muslims in the seven-year rule of the BJP led by a sangh pracharak is palpable.
However, it has now reached a stage where it is proving to be counterproductive, especially in the absence of any concrete proof of improvement in the lives of masses. While what Bhagwat said is a welcome departure from what the others have been saying, one cannot ignore the context in which these remarks have been made.
A representative image of the RSS. Credit: PTI
Changed political scenario
The sudden change of heart in my view is directly related to the changed political scenario and perhaps an  internal assessment by the RSS pointing toward an impending loss of political power in Uttar Pradesh – the largest state and also the crucible of the Hindutva ideology of hatred towards minorities. The loss of West Bengal despite the BJP’s communal electioneering has shown that the discerning citizen understands that while religion is important in their lives, it is survival and the availability of the basic needs which is more important.
In 2019, the BJP got a mandate larger than 2014 because the common man thought that a five-year term was too small to implement the agenda of “sabka vikas” and the party deserved a longer tenure to show results. The common man got taken in by the propaganda against previous governments of ‘minority appeasement’ and saw a messiah in Modi who was setting things right for the majority Hindu community. The BJP also had the advantage of being first off the block in utilising social media to its advantage. Their fortunes in 2019 were further helped by the unfortunate Pulwama bombings and the follow up incidents.
Also read: In Pulwama, Narendra Modi Has Found the Trigger He Needed before 2019 Elections
The social media advantage has now almost been blunted with opposition parties fast catching up and several fact-checking sites debunking false propaganda. The credibility of prominent TV channels is at the lowest ebb as was apparent during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) movement and also during elections in Bengal. The opposition also appears to be a little more organised to project an alternative narrative.
The lower- and middle-income groups continue to face a bleak future even after seven years of BJP rule. Rising unemployment and economic slowdown due to various factors with the second-highest employment generator – the realty sector – which was already reeling under the impact of demonetisation and the rollout of goods and services tax (GST), now facing the COVID-19 impact. High cost of fuel is the main contributor to inflation. The poor are hit by both high prices and a fall in real income. The manufacturing, retail business and inter-state movement of goods is severely affected by the poorly implemented GST.
Adding to the woes has been the dismal handling of the pandemic in the last two years. A poorly planned and hurriedly implemented nationwide lockdown in 2020 filled the roads with lakhs of people struggling to reach their homes. Total stoppage of transport of any kind forced them to walk thousands of miles, with many of them dying on the road.
Also read: RTI Shows the Government Did Collect Data on Deaths of Migrant Workers during Lockdown
Premature declaration of victory against the virus, utter failure to anticipate and prepare for the second wave which led to thousands of avoidable deaths and scenes of corpses abandoned in rivers has angered many amongst even strong supporters of the BJP.
The BJP’s insensitive handling of the farmers’ agitation and its failure to address their genuine concerns has united the masses despite the usual religious and caste divisions. Religious polarisation, therefore, may no longer be effective in garnering votes. The West Bengal assembly polls also established beyond doubt that Muslims almost totally voted as a block for whomsoever they thought will protect them against the communal politics of the BJP.
The sarsangchalak, therefore, has perhaps realised that in order to retain power in Uttar Pradesh, the BJP will need votes from all communities. The landslide victories of 2014, 2017 and 2019 are no longer guaranteed. With large states like West Bengal, Maharashtra and Rajasthan having been lost to opposition, the loss of Uttar Pradesh will sound a death knell for Hindutva protagonists. Hence the outreach.
The outreach by Mohan Bhagwat even though welcome is unlikely to have any effect on ground as the foot soldiers of the BJP and the RSS are too full of hatred towards Muslims. His statement is aimed only at addressing political concerns and does not reflect change of heart or deviation from communal ideology.


Sanjiv Krishan Sood retired as Additional Director General, Border Security Force.



Watch | Anti-CAA Women Protesters Enter Active Politics Ahead of 2022 UP Polls
The women activists say that they moved from activism to active electoral politics to intensify their political fight against the CAA.
Video05/Jul/2021Women dissenters who spearheaded the agitation against the citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) at the historical Ghanta Ghar in Lucknow in 2020 are now going to contest a political battle against the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) during the next assembly elections in Uttar Pradesh.
These women activists say that they moved from activism to active electoral politics to intensify their political fight against the CAA and to bring it into the centre of politics in the state.
<span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>

Behind Narendra Modi's Pseudo-Nationalist Mask
As Prime Minister Narendra Modi completes seven years at the helm, India is gasping for breath on economic and social fronts.
CommunalismEconomyGovernmentPolitics20/May/2021In May 2014, halfway through Narendra Modi’s first speech as India’s prime minister, I texted my friends that it feels good to have a leader who can speak. After ten years of Manmohan Singh, a technocrat with little oratorical skills, at the helm, it was a cautious embrace of a politician with a dark, divisive past, but promising reforms that would put India firmly on the path of becoming a developed country.
As we approach its seventh anniversary, Modi’s speeches are turning into vacuous drivel as Indians struggle to find hospital beds, oxygen cylinders or life-saving drugs for those who are alive. And the unfortunate ones are seeking firewood and a place to cremate their loved ones for a dignified goodbye. It did not have to be this way.
There is enough blame to go around in the second COVID-19 wave. As an autocratic prime minister, Modi deserves a lion’s share of it, but he had a good start. An infrastructure push that accelerated building highways, new airports, and expanding the train network. A Swachh Bharat mission to end open defecation. Improving electricity generation and distribution to reach every village. Redirecting cooking gas subsidies from the middle class to the needy. Opening bank accounts for every household to boost financial literacy and reduce corruption in disbursing subsidies. Bringing clean drinking water to every household.
While some of the initiatives, like the cooking gas scheme, are faltering due to skyrocketing prices of gas cylinders, others might become force multipliers in the long run, leading to rapid expansion of business activity, savings on health spending, or building human capital. However, as China has shown, such material gains do not always translate into winning the fierce global competition for talent to lead tomorrow’s knowledge-based economy.
In Modi’s India, demonetisation in 2016 was the first red flag. While the avoidable economic destruction it caused is well-documented, the underlying power grab went unaddressed. As the monetary authority, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the sole institution responsible for making currency notes available to the public. According to an insider account, printing of new Rs 2,000 and 500 notes had begun well in advance, but very few people, if any, were aware of the impending scrapping of 86% of notes in circulation. The RBI approved the decision hours before Modi announced it publicly to give it a veneer of institutional propriety, but the damage was done.
People gather at the entry gate of a bank to exchange and deposit their old high denomination banknotes in Jammu, November 15, 2016. Photo: Reuters/Mukesh Gupta
The aftermath proved that the RBI was not prepared for it. None of the stakeholders were consulted or even given enough time to prepare for bringing a $2 trillion economy to a standstill. The judiciary repeatedly gave Modi the benefit of doubt and none of the heads responsible for the chaos rolled. The parliamentary panel’s report on demonetisation never saw the light of day. While killing such reports is not new in India, the policy was emergency-esque in its consequences.
Manmohan Singh’s understated prediction of demonetisation shaving 1.5-2% off the GDP proved to be true. Meanwhile, the pliant media were busy amplifying Modi’s bombastic claims and childish speeches. As is our wont, instead of questioning the ability of one man to not just throw the economy for a toss, but even block access to our own money based on flimsy arguments, we celebrated the arrival of a messiah ushering India into a new era.
Modi’s apologists argue that the disruption due to demonetisation, along with the botched introduction of goods and services tax (GST) in 2017, were growing pains of a formalising economy. Several other Asian economies formalised without such carnage. Worse yet, instead of being rookie mistakes of a new administration, these were harbingers of India’s downward spiral. Modi’s megalomania, destruction of institutions, disdain of experts, and unilateral decision-making have had disastrous consequences on the economic and social fronts.
Also read: The World’s Five Worst Pandemic Leaders
The Indian economy
Jan Dhan Yojana, expansion of MNREGA and direct benefit transfer programmes, expedited digitisation of government records, and the vaunted ‘India Stack,’ a digital platform that can bring financial services to the underserved population, have unleashed innovation in financial technology. Despite widespread privacy concerns, and lack of smartphones or internet access in rural areas, the Indian financial sector is rapidly catching up with the developed world.
While environmental degradation has been a long-standing concern, removing bottlenecks in land purchases for infrastructure projects and streamlining approvals in mining will pay dividends. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India, if allowed to function without political interference, will accelerate the churn in businesses. Although haphazardly rammed through the parliament, the latest farm laws and labour reforms might make it easier to do business in India. Encouraging public-private partnerships and technology transfer in defense will lead to more innovation. Unfortunately, this list misses the forest for the trees. Modi’s biggest economic failure is the growing atmosphere of uncertainty and fear, which are antithetical to stable growth.
As if the carnage of demonetisation and the botched GST roll-out were not enough, the third blow of the pandemic-related stringent 2020 lockdown, without consulting the business community, hollowed out medium, small and micro enterprises (MSMEs) without serving its purpose of overcoming the pandemic. While the BJP claims that Modi successfully tamed the first wave, there was a massive gap between documented cases and serological surveys after the first wave showing upwards of 50% residents carrying COVID-19 antibodies in some urban areas. Ramped up testing and makeshift hospitals helped. However, India was just lucky in the first wave. Some as-yet-unknown lifestyle and genetic factors, along with a younger population, might have prevented widespread deaths, but the virus was circulating widely, waiting to strike back with deadlier mutations.
Modi’s reluctance to announce another national lockdown during the ongoing second wave is a tacit admission of the steep economic cost India paid for the first one, relegating India to the worst performing economy in the G-20. Unfortunately, while the specter of widespread human death now haunts India, state after state is announcing its own lockdown, making it de facto fourth instance of an economic logjam in seven years.
A migrant worker rides a cart with his family on a highway as they return to their villages, during a 21-day nationwide lockdown to limit the spreading of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), in Ghaziabad, on the outskirts of New Delhi, March 27, 2020. Photo: Reuters/Adnan Abidi
These major disruptions are interspersed with a long list of whimsical policies and U-turns. Constantly changing GST rates, taxes on angel investors, employee stock option policies for entrepreneurs, suggesting that banks invest in startups, half-baked attempts like Atal Innovation Mission to promote entrepreneurship in colleges that cannot even guarantee decent quality education, announcing various taxes and borrowing plans in budgets, only to withdraw them later, failure to stabilise the import/export duties regime, e-commerce policy flip-flops; it goes on and on.
Rather than being an exception, bungling of vaccine manufacturing is the norm in Modi’s era, leading to the ignominy of the Serum Institute of India now exploring other countries to scale up vaccine production. Ever eager to take credit for the success of Indian businesspersons, Modi rarely shares the blame. If anyone dissents, central tax authorities and investigative agencies are unleashed on them, further disincentivising businesses to expand in India. In terms of economic optimism, unemployment, and wage growth, Modi will be lucky if the 2024 numbers are anywhere near the 2014 numbers.
Also read: What Are the Costs of a Delayed Lockdown During Second Wave of COVID-19?
All along, Modi has refused to act in cleaning up the non-performing-assets (NPAs) ridden banking sector or selling public sector entities. The collapses of Yes Bank, infrastructure lender IL&FS, and smaller co-operative banks offered multiple missed opportunities to deal with NPAs. In 2017, the attempted sale of Air India did not find any buyers, leading the government to shelf its privatisation plans. The government has belatedly announced bold action on both fronts, but the second wave of COVID-19 is likely to delay tough decisions.
In election after election since 2014, reducing corruption in welfare schemes has helped Modi buy votes of the poor, but the tap started running dry even before the pandemic. Instead of saving its dividends for the rainy day, the RBI started covering up for the government’s lack of revenues well before early 2020. Modi also started pushing the government’s debt to the Food Corporation of India’s books to lie about his economic mismanagement. And to get re-elected in 2019, he even hid the historically high unemployment numbers.
Through massive interventions in the currency markets, the RBI has managed to keep the Indian economy competitive since the pandemic hit. Of late, it has also announced a major bond-buying programme to support Modi’s exploding borrowing plans for 2021-22. Perhaps the RBI’s substantial foreign currency reserves will prevent the bottom from falling out, but bond investors are finally calling Modi’s bluff. As India stares at stagflation and the RBI is pleading for sympathy towards the government instead of economic fundamentals to convince bond investors to accept lower rates, they are insisting on higher yields.
Ultimately, taxpayers will pay the economic price for Modi’s megalomania. By 2014, after two decades of liberalisation, India was legitimately knocking on the doors of the elite global economic powers club whose members can defy conventional macroeconomic wisdom on debt and deficit. Modi thought that he could avoid unpopular reforms, lie to his voters, and perpetually keep borrowing at low rates. That game might be nearing its end, especially if the US Federal Reserve increases its lending rate soon. And Modi’s economic legacy could include a lost decade or more.
Social atmosphere
In the run-up to the 2014 elections, Modi had eschewed his divisive past and embraced the idea of equitable social development in his campaign rhetoric. Behind the scenes, it was the foot soldiers of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) spreading a toxic, Hindu majoritarian ideology that delivered him the parliamentary majority. Middle-class liberals bought into Modi’s reformist economic vision in 2014, but the RSS and its sister organisations had been laying the groundwork for India’s dangerous communal turn for a couple of generations before that.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi along with UP governor Anandiben Patel, chief minister Yogi Adityanath, RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat and others perform Bhoomi Pujan rituals for the construction of the Ram Mandir, at Ayodhya on August 5. Photo: PTI
Unlike the early economic gains, the contradiction between what Modi had promised on the social front and the ground realities started appearing quite early in his first term. Through his strategic silence on incidents of Hindu-Muslim confrontations, lynching incidents of minorities, and his BJP colleagues using incendiary rhetoric, Modi tried to pretend that they were minor distractions to his grand plans of nation building.
On one hand, Skill India, Make in India, Start-up India, Smart Cities and a slew of other schemes were launched to enhance workforce efficiency and build a modern economy. On the other, BJP launched culture wars on college campuses. Instead of pouring precious little funds into upgrading schools and R&D infrastructure, developing scientific temper, and building on successes of previous administrations in the technology world, Modi was interested in taking on leftist hegemony in academic institutions.
Also read: The Limits of Hindutva’s Homegrown Authoritarianism
While right-wing lynch mobs and anti-Romeo squads were operating with impunity, frivolous sedition cases and investigations under the stringent Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) were initiated against students or journalists espousing opposing ideology or refusing to fall in line with religious majoritarianism. Modi’s ministers in charge of education, science and technology, and health started touting unproven theories and ideas, some rooted in ancient Hindu thought, at scientific conferences and international forums.
As the various human resource development schemes started faltering, the majoritarian Hindutva rhetoric became more and more shrill. Modi’s home ministry admitted in the parliament that there is no evidence of “love jihad”, the idea concocted by the right wing that Muslim men are marrying innocent Hindu girls to convert them to Islam. And yet, state after state ruled by the BJP started enacting laws to prevent it. The judiciary and law enforcement officials, already burdened with millions of pending cases and lack of resources, were forced to waste their time on political witch-hunts. Indian and foreign students were expelled for protesting government policies. And the BJP used its social media propaganda machine to constantly feed anti-Western narratives and Hindu victimhood.
Further decentralisation of education and attracting global talent took a back seat. Dubious science, quackery, and untested ancient Hindu practices were resurrected. Manufacturing sector started declining along with the overall economy. With widespread unemployment, the BJP doubled down on pseudo-nationalism and Hindutva to keep the youth engaged. Without doing any of the hard work required to build a modern economy, Modi started touting India as the Vishwaguru, a world leader, through photo-ops and selling achievements of previous administrations as his own.
As a result, despite India having one of the youngest populations in the world that is fast adopting technology, a vast majority of the youth lacks the understanding of the basic building blocks of a knowledge-based economy. While there are some bright spots in the start-up world, including a growing number of unicorns, India still lags in building unique products relevant to the world, even in areas like information technology that require minimal resources. India is nowhere on the map in resource-heavy technology development. Modi’s economic destruction will preclude any major government investment in R&D. And his social policies will scare away global talent, condemning India to a predominantly low-skill and low efficiency economy for another generation.
Amid this doom and gloom, all is not lost. If Modi removes his pseudo-nationalist mask, owns up to his failures, and commits to course-correction, he can reverse the economic setbacks. Sadly, it will take much longer to put the Hindu majoritarian genie back in the bottle to become a tolerant, liberal society again. Indians pressurising Modi to hold press conferences and holding him accountable would be a good start.
Seven years on, Modi is still speaking, but the rest of the world has unmasked him. They are waiting for the Indian media and voters to call his bluff.
Mauktik Kulkarni is an engineer, neuroscientist, entrepreneur, author and a filmmaker. He is the author of A Ghost of Che and Packing Up Without Looking Back.

How Bengali Civil Society Stood up Against the BJP
From a people’s campaign on 'No Vote To BJP' to a music video by a galaxy of artists against the party's 'ideology of hatred', the civil society in Bengal had a powerful impact in the recent polls. 
GovernmentPoliticsRightsSociety10/May/2021In the keenly watched assembly election of West Bengal, Mamata Banerjee brought the Modi-Shah politicking to a grinding halt. Banerjee secured a landslide victory for Trinamool Congress (TMC) as it swept the state by winning 213 of the 292 seats in the state. But keeping aside all the politics and statistics, there are voices of many Bengalis, some extremely popular, some completely unknown, who raised to the occasion and took a stand against voting for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ahead of the polls.
In November 2020, a group of people connected to various social and mass movements came together to create a forum called ‘Bengal against Fascist RSS-BJP’. The forum started a people’s campaign – ‘No Vote To BJP’, which went to the farthest corners of the state. Students, youngsters, teachers, doctors and social activists joined the forum voluntarily and campaigned for the cause.
Kushal Debnath, one of the convenors of the forum, had then told The Wire that through this campaign, they are not asking people to vote for TMC or any other political party, but requesting people to not vote for the BJP. “Stopping the BJP from coming to power in Bengal is extremely crucial today, otherwise their fascist aggression will gain steam across India,” Debnath said.
Dwaipayan Banerjee, a member associated with the forum, said, “We got support from people cutting across various socio-economic strata. People associated with cinema, music, theatre, academia, all joined the movement as they believed this was essential. People joined from different political backgrounds, but they did not represent their party ideology. They joined as individuals who genuinely believe that BJP must not come to power in Bengal,”
Another convenor of the forum, who played an active role throughout the campaign, Kasturi Basu said, “Our campaign minced no words in its attack on the BJP-RSS, exposing their every move as inimical to the interests of our people. It made no irresponsible comparisons of the fascist party BJP with other parties in the fray. It aimed to convince people, particularly those who have swung towards the BJP in the recent past, that this time they should not make a mistake again. It was imperative to stop the BJP from coming to power in Bengal to avoid centralised authoritarianism, to establish a firm mandate against NRC-CAA-NPR (National Register of Citizens-Citizenship Amendment Act-National Population Register), to uphold the sanctity of federalism, to say no more riots and religious majoritarian bigotry.”
The members organised street corner meetings, street plays, put up posters and distributed pamphlets in various towns and villages. They also set up a social media team which ran an intense online campaign parallel to the street campaign. The ‘No Vote To BJP’ campaign released a series of videos, each addressing various issues related to Bengal. The video series went viral and garnered millions of views.
The Joint Forum against NRC, a non-political civil society group, ran a campaign in various districts of West Bengal to educate people on CAA and NRC. The forum attacked the BJP and their leadership, alleging that the Union home minister Amit Shah was ‘bluffing and misleading’ the Matua community on citizenship issues.
Also read: What Will the West Bengal Election Result Mean for Bihar’s Political Parties?
“The Modi government at the Centre is deliberately issuing these rules now so that they can garner the support of Dalit refugees like Matua, Namasudras, Rajbangshis by hanging on to the roots of ‘unconditional citizenship’ before the assembly elections,” the forum had said on February.
The forum had also organised a ‘Citizenship Protection Yatra’, which started on February 26 from the border village of Betai and ran for a week in the refugee-concentrated areas of Nadia and North 24 Parganas, and ended on March 5. The main aim of the yatra was to raise awareness against the false promise of giving citizenship to the refugees and to demand repeal of the two laws, CAA 2003 and CAA 2019.
On asking what compelled the forum to organise this campaign amid a pandemic, Prasenjit Bose, a convenor of the forum, said, “First, we were fighting against the NRC-NPR-CAA 2003 and 2019, and the BJP, in its Bengal manifesto, mentioned that they will implement CAA after coming to power in Bengal. So, we were duty bound to fight this and make the Bengal electorate aware of the possible danger. Second, the Bengal election this time was not just another state election, it had national context. This election was fought against the backdrop of the pandemic, catastrophic farm laws, NRC, CAA and a whole lot of wrong policies. BJP’s win in Bengal would have bolstered their agenda of opposition-less India and weakened our democracy. So, with all means we had to fight to stop them.”
‘No Vote to BJP’ campaigners. Photo: Himadri Ghosh
Taking a stand
Theatre group ‘Jana Gana Mana’ performed a play called Indurer Kol (Mouse Trap) in various rural villages in Bengal. The play fundamentally premised against the fascist forces dealing with issues like NRC, CAA, inflation, LPG price hike with a pinch of sarcasm. While performing at the Mangrove Theatre Centre in the Sundarbans region on the occasion of World Theatre Day, the cast and crew were attacked by the local BJP leaders.
Playwright Shubhankar Das Sharma had told The Wire, “We have seen in BJP-ruled states that freedom of speech and expression was suppressed. Here also, they are trying to silence people’s voices. They can try as much as they want to scare us, but we are not going anywhere, we are not scared. We will continue to enact the play at various places.”
The group enacted the play in more than 84 locations starting from August 2020.
Just three days ahead of the first phase of the assembly election, a galaxy of artists from cinema, theatre and music fields came together in a music video, highlighting the need to stamp out ‘fascist forces’. In a song titled ‘Nijeder Mote, Nieder Gaan’ (Our song about our views), without explicitly naming the BJP, the artists had taken a stand against its “ideology of hatred”. The music video features artists such as Parambrata Chatterjee, Anirban Bhattacharya, Sabyasachi Chakraborty, Rudraprasad Sengupta, Anupam Roy, Rupankar Bagchi, Riddhi Sen and Suman Mukhopadhyay.
The song, penned by one of the top film and theatre actors from West Bengal, Anirban Bhattacharya, touches upon issues like communal violence, love-jihad and forced nationalism, while promoting pluralism, fake news and propaganda. The video is directed by actors Riddhi Sen and Rwitobroto Mukherjee.
Poster of the music video. Photo: Special arrangement
The Wire asked Parambrata Chatterjee if he ever feared backlash for taking a stand against the central government, to which he said, “Definitely. We have been seeing the BJP in power since 2014. We witnessed many wrongs by this dispensation. But [we] haven’t spoken enough about it because of some kind of fear. Now that it came to us, to capture our state, steamroll politics of hate and divide, which defies all democratic norms, we can’t stay quiet. We have to speak against a fascist, autocratic dispensation.”
Chatterjee opined that civil society has an important role to play in society and therefore, it should speak about the pressing issues. “History shows how artists in India and across the globe played a crucial role in various socio-economic and socio-cultural issues.” “India’s foundation is unity in diversity. Now if some party or government tries to appropriate culture with an aim to create a homogenised society, it goes against the very idea of India. That must be resisted. People must speak up,” he further said.
Also read: How West Bengal Halted the BJP’s Chariot
The video not only received appreciation from people across the country, but also created a controversy as the makers were verbally attacked  by several BJP leaders. BJP state president Dilip Ghosh even issued a warning and said, “Artists should restrict themselves to singing and dancing. Don’t try to do politics. Leave that to us. Or else we will take care of them.”
Speaking to The Wire, sociologist Piya Chakraborty, who was also part of the video, said, “Since January, with the increasing polarisation regarding Bengal elections and the overall religious fascism, crushing of dissent and economic decline in the entire country.. We felt like we had to express our thoughts. Art was the best way to resist.”
When asked about why she felt resisting the BJP was so central to this election and the political future of Bengal, Chakraborty said, “The politics of the BJP centres around religious polarisation and Hindu majoritarianism. Not only does that go against the secular ethos of Bengal but also dangerous for its minority population and overall maintenance of peace and coexistence.”
During the election, a band from Kolkata, Fiddler’s Green, released a song urging voters of Bengal to be ‘hushiyar'(beware). The song is a part of the video series produced and directed by senior journalist Paranjoy Guha Thakurta. The basic theme of the song was to urge people to be aware of the seeds of hatred that are being sown and how it could have serious consequences in the future.
Screengrab from Fiddler’s Green music video Dike Dike Hao Hushiar.
Songwriter Swadesh Misra said that since the BJP came to power at the Centre, he was closely following deep distress in the society, from demonetisation to farm laws to divisive policies like CAA, NRC, attacks on dissenters, oppression of communities, aggressive push of North India culture etc. “I felt the urge to take a stand against the fascist regime which has captured all institutions and bulldozed India’s federal structure through its one language, one nation, one government policy. When I got the chance to be a part of this project, I jumped immediately.”
Misra further said that the BJP’s win in Bengal would have helped the saffron party in taking forward their agenda of establishing a Hindu Rashtra. “They [BJP] are doing social engineering to change this country, destroy India’s secular values and end the idea of co-existence. BJP’s Bengal win would have boosted their agenda.”
Last but not the least, the visit of farm leaders from Delhi border to Bengal. Although it can be debated if it had any electoral impact, but, their visit and doing mahapanchayat in places like Nandigram, Singur and Asansol created a talking point both in rural and urban Bengal.
Leader of the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU) Rakesh Tikait got a huge response when he reached Nandigram for the mahapanchayat. In a scathing attack on the BJP, Tikait said in Nandigram, “BJP is planning to ruin the lives of farmers by supporting big corporations. They don’t care about you and me. They are here to sell this country’s asset and hand it over to companies. This government is not run by a party, it is run by companies. So, to teach a lesson, BJP must be defeated. You will have to defeat them in Bengal.”

Podcast: Muslims Are Feeling Excluded, But Anti-CAA Protests Provided a Positive Opportunity Forward
In conversation with Ali Khan Mahmudabad, an academic and scholar who teaches at Ashoka University.
CommunalismVideo27/Apr/2021In recent years, the Muslims of India have been besieged by the forces of Hindutva and by a series of legal measures that appear designed against them, from the Citizenship (Amendment) Act to various states’ ‘love jihad’ laws. Ali Khan Mahmudabad feels that it won’t stop at Muslims – others will be targeted too.
Mahmudabad, an academic and scholar who teaches at Ashoka University, says the community is feeling excluded. In a podcast interview with Sidharth Bhatia, he says that the emergence of young voices, especially of women, is a chance for Muslims to come together.
<span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>

Delhi Riots | 'Complete Lack of Supervision, FIRs Clubbed to Protect Accused': Court Slams Police
'The investigating agency has evidently been found to be on the wrong side of law,' ASJ Vinod Yadav noted.
CommunalismLawRights26/Apr/2021New Delhi: A Delhi court on Monday, April 26, observed that the Delhi Police’s senior officers have displayed a “complete lack of supervision” in investigation into several cases of the Delhi riots of February 2020.
Additional Sessions Judge Vinod Yadav also noted that the practice of clubbing several FIRs into one has been used to “protect the accused” in the violence, Indian Express has reported.
ASJ Yadav made the observations while dismissing a revision petition filed by Delhi Police against an order by a magisterial court to lodge separate FIRs on the complaint of one Nishar Ahmed.
The sessions court noted that instead of filing two FIRs, the police had clubbed Ahmed’s complaint with another plea, that was related to only a single incident that took place on February 25, 2020, without realising that his complaint disclosed the acts of two separate dates – February 24 and another of February 25.
“I do not find any substance in the present petition filed by the State. The investigating agency has evidently been found to be on the wrong side of law. This Court has found in several cases of riots in the entire length and breadth of police stations in north-east Delhi that there was complete lack of supervision of the investigation(s) by the senior police officers of the District,” ASJ Yadav noted.
Also read: ‘Witness Accounts Undated, Not Named in Complaint’: Court Grants Delhi Riots Accused Bail
He also added that remedial measures were required in the matter.
“All is not over yet. If the senior officers now look into the matter(s) and take remedial measures required in the matter(s), so that justice could be given to the victims,” the judge said.
Ahmed had had said that on February 25, 2020 a riotous mob vandalised and looted his house in Gokalpuri area and set fire to his two motorcycles parked outside.
He also claimed that the incident took place after a clarion call was given on February 24, 2020 to the persons of a particular community to vandalise and set on fire the houses of persons of another community.
Ahmad claimed that the police took down “a very small complaint regarding a theft” when, on March 18, at the Eidgah relief camp in Mustafabad, he had given a detailed account of the incident, Express reported.
The police had clubbed his complaint with an FIR that was related to the incidents that took place on February 25, 2020 without mentioning anything about February 24, 2020 incident.
Also read: A Year After Delhi Riots, Muslim Families Are Selling Homes and Moving Out
“There are clear allegations by the respondent against the named police official(s) of PS Gokalpuri, who had refused to register FIR on his complaint and forced him to give merely complaint of theft (complaint dated 04.03.2020),” the court observed, according to Indian Express.
He had approached a magisterial court, which had directed the police to lodge two separate FIRs, one related to the incidents of February 24 and the another of February 25.
The police, however, approached the sessions court against the order passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate. This was rejected by ASJ Yadav on Monday.
“Even the offence of criminal conspiracy, prima facie made out in relation to February 24 incident, was not been invoked by Delhi Police in any of the cases where either the respondent is complainant or witness,” the judge noted.
He also said that he did not find “even semblance of investigation with regard to the criminal conspiracy hatched by the persons named in complaint dated 18.03.2020” either by investigating officer or by the Special Cell.
Also read | Delhi Riots: Court Raps Police For Not Maintaining Files in Mosque Desecration Case
The judge also observed that there has been “clear diversions of action/investigation by the police” in a case where “the persons who participated at the protest site in the capacity of organisers have been made accused persons.” The protest ostensibly refers to one against the Citizenship Amendment Act. The Delhi Police has been criticised over naming anti-CAA protesters as accused in the riots repeatedly while overlooking the roles of active participants of the violence.
Express reported that the judge also noted that “in many cases, 25 complaints have been clubbed into a single FIR having different dates of incidents, different complainants, different witnesses and different set of accused persons,” in a practice that sought to “protect the accused, even if the offence is same.”
On April 7, a Delhi court had pointed out in no uncertain terms, the Delhi Police’s laxity in investigating the burning of the Madina Mosque mosque during the riots.
On March 26, ASJ Yadav had expressed dissatisfaction with Delhi Police for not having maintained files in connection with the probe into the desecration of the Masjid.
(With PTI inputs)




Watch: How Are Muslims Voting in the Kerala Elections?
Muslims account for more than 25% of the voters in Kerala. The Wire spoke to people in Mallapuram and Calicut to know about their issues.
GovernmentPoliticsReligionVideo06/Apr/2021In the Kerala assembly elections, Muslims account for more than 25% of the voters. Senior editor Arfa Khanam Sherwani spoke to people in Mallapuram, where the majority of Kerala‘s Muslim voters reside, to know about their issues.
One of the voters talked about how the state has no restrictions on praying in temples, mosques or churches irrespective of any religion, and how the CPI(M) treats people of all religions as equals.
In Calicut, a voter spoke about how some Muslims were ill-treated and put behind bars during the anti-CAA and anti-NRC protests while no stringent action was taken against a right-wing Hindu man who allegedly raped a minor at a madrassa. Another voter added that the Bharatiya Janata Party doesn’t stand a chance to rule in Kerala.


CAA to Be Implemented, No Plans For NRC Exercise in Bengal: Kailash Vijayvargiya
"We do not have any plan of conducting the NRC exercise, even if we win the elections," he said.
Politics04/Apr/2021Kolkata: In an interview to PTI, Kailash Vijayvargiya, the Bharatiya Janata Party’s national general secretary, said that if voted to power in Bengal, the party will not take up any exercise to update the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and said the opposition Trinamool Congress was wrong in saying that the party will be “taking away the citizenship rights of people”.
The party’s Bengal minder, however, said that BJP intends to implement the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and provide rights to (non-Muslim) refugees who fled religious persecution in neighbouring countries and moved to India.
“We are only looking forward to implementing the CAA after the elections, as promised in the manifesto. It is an important issue for us, as we strive to grant citizenship to the persecuted refugees. We do not have any plan of conducting the NRC exercise, even if we win the elections,” he said.
Accusing the TMC of “running a disinformation campaign against the saffron camp, the 64-year-old leader asked why the ruling party in the state is opposing the CAA, which could be of benefit to many.
Bengal has a sizeable population of Matuas, who had been migrating to the state since the 1950s, primarily due to religious persecution. The community, with its three million members, influences at least four Lok Sabha seats and 30-40 assembly seats in Nadia, North and South-24 Parganas.
Also read: Modi’s Bangladesh Temple Visits Stir Memories of a Bengal Marked by Religious Syncretism
Training his guns on Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee over her assertion that the “Election Commission was working at the behest of the BJP“, Vijayvargiya, said it was an irony that the TMC boss pointed no finger at the poll panel when her party registered two successive electoral victories.
Calling Banerjee’s claims “foolish”, he said the TMC, sensing defeat, is levelling absurd allegations against the saffron party.
“Mamata Banerjee never felt that the EC was acting partially when she won the polls. The irony is that when you were winning the elections, everything seems fine. Once you start sensing defeat, you blame the EC and the electronic voting machines,” he said.
Exuding confidence that the BJP will sweep the assembly elections, with more than 200 seats in its kitty, Vijayvargiya also downplayed insinuations that the party could be at a disadvantage for not having projected a chief ministerial face in Bengal, and said “several leaders are capable of taking the reins of the state” and a decision would be taken only after the polls.
Asked whether the rift between old-timers and newcomers over ticket distribution has been reined in, he said everyone in the party will have to abide by the rules and regulations laid down by the top brass.
(With PTI inputs)


