CHAPTER I

MY CHILDHOOD

I WAS born in 1864 at the old house known as "Sen's House"
which my great-grandfather built at Coolootola, a part of
Calcutta where many of our family lived. My birth was always
remembered in connection with a storm which occurred when
I was six days old, a most important time to a Hindu baby, for
then the Creator is supposed to visit the home, and write upon
its forehead the little one's fate. Perhaps people will think the
stormy weather in the beginning signified a stormy future for
me.
No girl could have been more fortunate in her parents than
I. My father, the great Keshub Chunder Sen, is considered one
of the most remarkable men India has ever produced, and my
dear mother belonged to the best type of Hindu woman.
Gentle, loving, and self-denying, her whole life was beautiful in
its goodness and its simplicity.
The story of a great religious movement is not one which
can be told at length in a book of memories.
The religion for which my father suffered and which will be for
ever connected with his name is the Brahmo or Religion of the
New Dispensation, a religion of tolerance and charity. To quote

my father's words, "The New Dispensation in India neither
shuts out God's light from the rest of the world, nor does it run
counter to any of those marvelous dispensations of His mercy
which were made manifest in ancient times. It simply shows a
new interpretation of His eternal goodness, an Indian version
and application of His universal love."
My readers do not perhaps quite know the meaning of
Brahmo. A Brahmo is a person who believes in Brahmoe (One
God). There is a Hindu god called Brahmuna, with four headsBrahmoe is not that god. Some Western people may think
Brahmins are the same as Brahmos. Once I remember an
English lady saying to me:
"I met some Brahmo ladies . . ."
I asked, "How did you know they were Brahmos?"
"Because they wore lace on their heads."
Others have an idea that all advanced Indian ladies must be
Brahmos.
If my readers by some good fortune have read ancient
Indian history they will know what the real Indian religion
was. There was one God and no belief in caste, in fact there
was no such thing as caste. Caste meant a different thing in
those days. It referred to character and life. A Brahmin lived a
pure and holy life, and preached religion. Next
MY FATHER'S HOUR. OF TRIAL

to the Brahmins were the Katnyas; they were rulers, fighting
people; they guarded their families, states, and countries. Then
came the Sudhras, who served the others. But now there are
hundreds of different castes, which makes people rather
narrow-minded, for if one believes in caste one can never

believe in universal brotherhood.
From the days of his youth my father was earnest and
devout. He must have gone through much trouble of mind
before he decided to fly in the face of family tradition and take
a step which meant partial separation from his nearest and
dearest. My mother was a member of a strict Hindu family, and
their marriage had been solemnised with Hindu rites; but she
did not fail him in the hour of trial. I have often heard my
mother talk of the difficulties of those days, before she left
Coolootola with my father. When he announced his
approaching conversion, the "Sen House" was plunged into a
state of agitation, and my mother was by turns entreated and
threatened by angry and dismayed relatives. "Do not go against
our customs," urged the purdah ladies. "You are one of us. Your
place is here. You must not renounce your caste. Imagine the
results of such a dreadful sin." When thus reproached, the
young girl dreaded the horrors of the unknown. It may be that
she wavered; but if so, it was not for long; and it was arranged
that she should go with my father to be converted by the
Maharshi D. Tagore. On the day fixed for their
departure a note came. My father had written simply; "I am
waiting." Then my mother knew she must decide her future for
good and all. All the relations were screaming, crying, and
threatening my mother, saying that she would bring disgrace
on the family by leaving the house, and thus losing her caste.
But it did not hinder her, because of those three simple words
-" I am waiting"- the call of Love. When she realized their
meaning, she threw off the fetters of the past and went forth to
meet her destiny. There was a round staircase used by the
purdah ladies where she knew my father awaited her. The
trembling girl hurriedly traversed corridors and verandahs
until she reached it. Fearfully she descended the dark steps,

her heart beating with fright, until at last she saw my father.
He said quietly: "I want you to realize your position fully. If you
come with me, you give up caste, rank, money, and jewels. The
relations who love you will become estranged from you. The
bread of bitterness will be your portion. You will lose all except
me. Am I worth the sacrifice?"
My mother had had a most beautiful and wonderful vision,
which is too sacred for me to relate. This gave her strength and
courage, she did not hesitate but descended the steps and
joined my father. It was a moment too wonderful for words.
They looked into each other's eyes. He read perfect faith and
courage in hers. She saw in his a love which gave her
confidence to face the future. They
THE UNBARRING OF THE GREAT DOOR

passed down the corridor and found themselves in the first
courtyard opposite the great entrance, where the durwans
(gatekeepers) were standing on guard.
Twice my father ordered the durwans to open the door, but
they did not move. It was very still in the courtyard. My
mother was frightened. This was a strange adventure, and
hitherto she had hardly seen a man except her husband. A
trembling, slim girl, she stood near my father with her headdress pulled quite low. Across the door there was a huge iron
bar, which was too heavy for one man to lift. My father, seeing
that the durwans would not open the door, went to lift the bar
and did so quite easily. Then a voice was heard speaking from
the upper floor. It was my father's eldest brother. He had
watched all that had happened, and, seeing that my parents
were determined, he decided to let them go. "Let them pass,

and open the gate," he called out to the durwans. The
wondering durwans threw open the door, and my parents
passed from the shadows into the sunlight.
My father took my mother to the beautiful house of
Maharshi Debendra Nath Tagore. The household were all
waiting to welcome them, though they had great doubts
whether my father would be able to bring my mother away
from such a strict Hindu family. The Maharshi introduced my
mother to his daughters as if she had been his own child.
Although a rich man's daughter-in-law and a rich youth's wife,
my mother was wearing a simple sari
with hardly any jewels. She always spoke of the great kindness
and affection she received from this family, and she deeply
revered the old Maharshi. We have always felt that there is a
great bond between our two families.
My parents remained away for some time during which my
father's formal conversion took place. After some months my
grandmother and uncle begged him to return, and gave him a
small house near the big house. There my parents lived until
my father fell seriously ill, and his eldest brother declared that,
in spite of all difficulties, he must come back to the old home.
He came back, and after long suffering and much careful
nursing grew well again. My dear old grandmother and all my
aunts and uncles were very glad to have my father and mother
back among them. A few months later my eldest brother was
born, and the Maharshi Debendra Nath Tagore gave him the
name Karuna.
The new arrangement was not without its trials. Our branch
of the family had lost caste, and we underwent all kinds of
vexations in consequence. One great trouble was with the
servants. No Hindu would wait upon us, and a procession of
cooks who objected to "Christians" (anyone who was not a

Hindu in those days was called a Christian) came and went.
My father's happy nature enabled him, however, to rise above
such discomforts, and, as he was cheerfully seconded by my
mother, caste soon had no terrors for us..
THE ROSE GARDEN AT BELGHURIA

Our days were full of interest, and some of my earliest
recollections are connected with the female education
movement which my father started. There was an
establishment called the Asram where his followers from all
different classes lived in happy disregard of caste and class.
This house was quite close to Coolootola, and there I spent
many happy days with my sister-in-law, then Miss Kastogir, the
ideal of my girlhood.
I remember another delightful house which a friend lent to
my father for his people. It was a beautiful place with two big
buildings in its grounds. In these houses the Asram people
came and lived for months, and we stayed there too. I have the
happiest memories of this Belghuria garden-house; it always
seemed to me a Paradise on earth. I was a little girl when I first
went there, but I never smell a rose without recalling the
vanished perfume of the roses in that wonderful garden. There
were roses everywhere. They scattered my path with scented
softness, and turned their flushed or sweetly pale faces to meet
my wondering eyes. Roses of youth ... the fairest. Are any
others ever so treasured?
We were not allowed to pluck the fruit or flowers in the
Belghuria garden, and I remember seeing cards in my father's
clear handwriting fixed on the trees, which forbade us to hurt
the growing loveliness.
My father had indeed a striking personality: tall and broad-

shouldered, he gave one the impression
of great strength. I always thought of him as an immortal; his
eyes were "homes of silent prayer." Lord Dufferin once
remarked to me: "I did not know you were Mr. Sen's daughter.
I've traveled far and seen many handsome men, but never one
so handsome." Sir A. A. Chowdhuri's father once said: "Mr.
Keshub is no ordinary man, as you can tell by the perfect shape
of his feet and the pink sole." And my dear husband often said,
"A sculptor would give anything to have your father's foot as a
model." The expression of his face, people said, was like that of
Buddha, calm and quiet. His voice was gentle, yet clear, and
even by a large crowd every word could be distinctly heard. He
had wavy hair and wonderfully white even teeth, and there was
always a smile on his face. My father was quite indifferent to
caste, although the Brahmo creed as first practiced by
Maharshi Debendra Nath Tagore and his followers included it,
and this caused a split between my father and his old friend.
They disagreed on this point, and finally my father left the
Maharshi Tagore, first, because of the question of caste, and
secondly, because of the Maharshi's jealousy of my father's
influence with his followers. I remember hearing people talk
of the powerful influence of my father's teachings. Even men
with large families gave up their occupations to follow him.
They looked upon him as almost a divinity, and I myself
believe he was gifted with extraordinary powers, as the
following strange incident seems to prove.
MY FATHER'S STRANGE POWER

In a house at Monghyr, a few hours' journey from Calcutta,

my father lived at one time with his followers. One morning,
after the usual service was over, a gentleman who had been
present waited hoping my father would say he need not go to
the office that day. As my father, however, said nothing he left
looking very sad. After some time my father said to his
followers:
"You did not want Mr. ---- to go?"
"No, we hoped you would let him stay," was the reply.
"Do you want him to come back?"
"'Well, he's about a mile away; how can any one overtake him?"
My father smiled and asked for a khole (a sort of drum), and
struck it gently, calling the gentleman by name as he did so. It
seems incredible, but is nevertheless true, that the person thus
summoned heard the call as he stood under a tree by the
roadside.
"I hear him," he cried, "I am to return," and to the great
surprise of all he did return, and related how he had heard his
name called. My father used to tell us stories from the Bible
and other sacred books, and I remember how much impressed
we were with the story of the Ten Virgins. He described it so
well that we could see the whole thing, and I remarked: "We
must be careful not to run out of oil or to fall asleep when the
bridegroom is coming." He also told us many other stories, and
one was a particular favorite.
There was once a rich Maharajah who was very fond of mottoes
and sayings, and always rewarded handsomely any person who
brought him a new one. In a village near his palace lived four
Brahmin brothers who were so poor they often could not get
their daily meal. One day they said to each other: "Our
Maharajah is generous, he richly rewards those who bring him
words of wisdom. Let us try and make some." These Brahmin
brothers were not only poor but stupid, and could think of

nothing. Although by the next day they were not ready for the
visit, they made up their minds to go and see what they could
do. On the way the eldest brother suddenly stopped, saying:
"I have got it, I have got it. I am sure I shall receive a handsome
present." The other three were very much excited and eagerly
asked what it was.
"I saw a rat," he said, " and I thought: 'Silently he picks a hole
in the wall.''' The brothers thought this splendid and looked
forward to a great reward. A little further on the second
brother stopped, saying:
"I have got one too."
"What is it?" they asked.
"Bump, bump, bump, he jumps."
"How did you think of it?" they asked. "Did you not see a frog
jumping from one side of the road to the other?" After a while
the third brother shouted:
"Mine is the best."
"What is yours?" they asked excitedly.
"Hither and thither he looks."
"What does that mean?" they inquired.
"Did you not see a squirrel on the branch looking here, there,
and everywhere?" When the
THE STORY OF FOUR POOR BROTHERS

palace came in sight the youngest brother was in tears; he
could think of nothing. " You will all receive your presents," he
said, "I must wait without for you." But when they arrived at
the door and the kobal took their message to the Maharajah
the youngest brother's face beamed and he followed the others
into the ruler's presence.

Each had written his saying upon a piece of paper and it was
placed upon a tray. After a while the Maharajah said, "It grows
late. Return for your rewards tomorrow, when I shall have read
your papers," and the brothers, bowing, retired. Towards
midnight the Maharajah awoke and bethought himself of the
papers brought by the four poor brothers, and of his promise
to read them. He rose from his bed and went towards the
window, that looked out upon the terrace of the palace, with
the papers in his hand. Now it chanced that just at that
moment the kobal (page-boy) was under the window trying to
make a hole through the wall through which to enter and
murder the Maharajah. Suddenly he heard the voice of the
Maharajah. "Silently he picks a hole in the wall." Terrified, the
kobal left the hole and hopped across the terrace. "Bump,
bump, bump, he jumps," the Maharajah continued. The kobal
stopped, looking this way and that in his panic. "Hither and
thither he looks," the voice went on. The trembling kobal
tiptoed away, but the voice reading the youngest brother's
paper followed him: "The kobal walks on
the marble, thud, thud, thud." Convinced now that the
Maharajah could see him and knew everything, the wretched
kobal fled. Next morning he went to one of the officers of the
palace, and falling at his feet confessed his intended crime and
told how the Maharajah had seen all he did. The officer at once
went to the Maharajah and told him the whole story. When the
four poor brothers arrived soon after at the palace they were
amazed to receive as a reward for their sayings, thousands and
thousands of rupees, while the youngest was given a house and
provision for life, the Maharajah saying he would ever be
grateful to him for having saved his life.
Coolootola was the starting point for many of our religious

excursions. We always delighted in these journeys, as they
meant "seeing things." One of the missionaries, Kaka Babu,
who had charge of the money and arranged all the details of
our everyday life, took care of my eldest brother and me. We
traveled sometimes by train, and sometimes in a box-like horse
carriage, which was rather uncomfortable, yet I have gone from
Agra to Jaipur in it.
A certain visit we made to Etawah interested us very much.
The house intended for our use was not ready, and we were
obliged to spend the night in an old place which had once
been a public building. My mother could not sleep, for she had
a feeling of horror although there seemed at first nothing to
alarm her. But before long she beheld a most awful vision,
which lasted the rest of the night. She saw in the
A VISION OF THE MUTINY

huge hall soldiers in red uniforms and Indians struggling
together; great pools of blood were on the floor, and women
and children were weeping. At first my mother thought it was
only a dream; but when she opened her eyes she saw it as
vividly as when they were closed, and terrified she longed for
the dawn. At daybreak she told my father of the vision. He was
surprised, as were his followers; for years before during the
Mutiny a massacre had actually taken place in the hall. My
father had not told my mother lest she should be nervous;
when she heard the story my mother insisted on moving into
another house, and we left then and there.
I remember a journey to Jubbalpore when I first realized the
devotion of Indian wives to their husbands. We drove to a little
house built upon a rock among the hills, about which there

was this story:
"In bygone times a certain Maharajah was going to fight the
Mohammedans, and his wife, who loved him, wished to
accompany him.
"It is impossible," he said. "How can you go with me?"
"I will not remain alone in the palace," she answered firmly.
"But I am going to fight."
"No matter, my place is by your side."
"You cannot come with me."
The loving Maharani then said to her husband:
"I came to this palace as your wife, your Maharani. I shall not
remain in the palace without you, my
lord, my husband, my Maharajah, not even for an hour. If I am
not allowed to go to the battlefield with you, I, your Maharani,
will leave the palace and go wherever you like to send me. If it
is your fate to return victorious, I shall return as your Maharani
to the palace."
The husband, although a commander and a ruler, spoke to
her very gently in a voice full of love and sympathy: "My
beautiful little wife, where will you go? How can I leave you in
discomfort? You are my Maharani and do not know the
hardships of the world."
"Oh," she said, "my lord, do you think that I would be happy
without you in this place of luxury and wealth? No, my lord, let
me go. You and I will leave the palace together. You are going to
fight for your country, my brave and handsome young
husband, and I, your little wife, will be thinking of you and
your love wherever I may be."
The story goes that the Maharajah granted his wife's
request, and had this little house built in one night on a single
piece of rock among the hills. There she anxiously awaited

news of him. Alas! the enemy was victorious and the
Maharajah killed. Never would he return and take her from
that place of waiting, back to the palace where they had lived
and loved.
Then came the supreme act of devotion, the willing
sacrifice. The widowed Maharani offered herself, to the flames
upon a funeral pyre near the
AN INDIAN GIRL OF DAYS AGO

house on the rock, and I remember that, as darkness fell in
that lonely spot, I felt as if I were living in another world. My
childish heart vaguely wondered what that love could be which
made people careless of life. The future was then mercifully as
obscure as the evening shadows. I was to know later that the
agony of the fire is nothing compared with the fierce flames of
aching remembrance. The pang of death is happiness
compared with the weary time of waiting to rejoin the beloved
husband who has gone before. The little house is still standing.
The childhood of an Indian girl of years ago may have some
interest now, and I must say that I do not admire the modern
upbringing of children. Our old system had many defects, but
it had also many advantages, chiefly the ideas of simplicity and
duty which were primarily inculcated in the little ones.
Religion was never uninteresting to us and lessons were a
pleasure. I was the second of ten children, and named after
Sunity, the mother of Dhruba. I got up early and by nine
o'clock my eldest brother, "Dada," and I were ready for school.
I went to Bethune College and he to a boys' school. We came
back at four. I had a second bath. My hair was arranged and I
had a meal of fruit and sweets. Then came the glorious hour of

fun and freedom when the innumerable children of "Sen's
House" played together.
My mother always helped Dada and me prepare our lessons
in both English and Bengali, and we
always prayed with her in a small room next to our bedroom.
There we were taught little mottoes: "Always speak the truth,"
"Respect and obey your parents." Once I had a very high fever
and my mother told me not to go to school, but I loved my
school, and when my mother had gone to the service I had my
bath quietly and dressed, and went off in the school bus. After
a short time I shivered so much that Miss Hemming, one of
the teachers of whom I was very fond, put me on a couch,
covered me up well, and when I felt a little better sent me
home. How often I felt and still feel that I suffered because I
disobeyed my dear mother.
Looking back on those days of childhood I have vivid
memories of their happiness. The great house seemed an
enchanted palace. It is difficult to convey to English readers a
real idea of the fascination of its cool, silent interior with the
six courtyards, and the deep wells which supplied drinking
and bathing water. In the zenana part of the establishment
where the strict purdah ladies lived, the rooms ran round one
of these courtyards, and the ladies were never allowed to walk
outside it. When they went into town, the "palkis" came right
inside to fetch them. I remember wonderful games of hideand-seek which we children played about the courtyards and
the old house. I was too young then to understand what
"conscience' sake" meant.
The whole of the domestic arrangements at Coolootola were
on patriarchal lines, and strange to

IN THE ZENANA

relate, family quarrels were rare, although there was a very
large number of women living together under the same roof.
When I say that our household included fifty relations, some
idea of the size of the establishment will be arrived at.
As I grew older I began to feel that I was rather an outsider
in the festivities which the other girls enjoyed, and I discovered
this was due to my loss of caste, but, as everyone at Coolootola
was very fond of me, I soon threw aside my real or imaginary
troubles. I used to run about the zenana, and admire my pretty
cousins, who seemed to pass their time doing wool-work
slippers for their husbands. They never liked people to know
this, and the wools and canvas were hurriedly hidden when
anyone came in. The mothers looked after the housekeeping
and played cards in their leisure time. I remember one aunt
who was famous for her card parties.
My grandmother, who was very handsome, was the head of
the house. She exacted and received the utmost deference
from her daughters-in-law, who never dared to speak to their
husbands in her presence. She had a warm corner in her heart
for me. I was never afraid of her, although I used to wonder
whether I should be like the other ladies when I grew up.
My grandmother Thakoorma was a grand cook. Although
she was a rich man's daughter-in-law, my grandmother cooked
and did the household work as if she were in a poor house. She
and her sister-in-law
used at one time to hide their brooms under their beds, each
meaning to try and get up earlier than the other to clean the

room; such was their delight in their housework.
The afternoon was the most delightful time of the day, for
then we bathed, dressed our hair, and arrayed ourselves in
dainty muslin saris preparatory to going on the roof. I loved
that hour, and the memory of it often comes back to me. I
close my eyes and dream I am a child again sitting in the midst
of that happy group, and can almost feel the welcome breeze
once more fanning my face. As we sat and told stories we
sometimes caught glimpses of a splash of color on the roof of
distant houses and knew that other girls were also enjoying the
cool of the day.
I used always to associate perfume and soap with my
married cousins; in fact, I believed that some people married
on purpose to get unlimited supplies of soap and scent. "You
won't get married, Sunity," the cousins would laugh. "Oh yes, I
will," I would reply. "Then I shall have lovely perfumes, and as
much soap as I want."
The young wives were never allowed to see their husbands
during the day; but often when I played in the front courtyard I
heard my name called softly and would be asked to convey
love-letters between the temporarily separated couples, who
found time long without each other in the first days of
wedlock. I also remember the open air operas (jatras)
YOUNG GIRLS MAKE THEIR VOWS

which were performed in the field close to the house. The
advent of the players was always the signal for my father's
youngest brother to nail down the shutters on that side of the
house if he thought the acting of the jatras not quite proper for
the ladies to hear.

One of our customs is for young girls to make vows as they
worship before symbolic figures made of flour, or painted on
the ground. "May I have a good husband," prays one. "May I be
rich," sighs her worldly-minded sister. Marriage and wealth are
as important in the East as in Mayfair. My vows, ordered by my
father, were planned on different lines, and usually excited pity
or amusement. I promised to give money to the poor, never to
tell a lie, to feed animals and birds, and to give people cool
beverages during the hot weather.
Oh happy days: I can still smell the incense which burnt
before the idol at twilight when the elder ladies made their
devotions. From across the gulf of time I can hear the faint
tinkle of the bells, and the peace of the past pervades my soul.
It was a heavenly feeling when Arati (evening prayer) time
came and the elderly ladies, among whom the most prominent
figure was that of my dear old grandmother, bowed themselves
in homage to their god in the sanctuary. The conch shells and
the bells sounded, the flowers and the incense gave out their
delicious perfume, and family life seemed to me heavenly and
pure.

CHAPTER II

MY FAMILY

THE Asram near Coolootola consisted of two houses joined
together, and there we lived for a time with many of my
father's followers as one big united family (a thing hitherto
unheard of in India), addressing each other as sisters and
aunts, uncles and brothers. My father held a service in the hall
every morning. His motto was "Faith, Love, and Purity," and
upon this he always acted. His life was a pilgrimage of
extraordinary faith which made him trust in the infinite mercy
of God even in the darkest hour, of love which enabled him to
view the failings of others with perfect charity and
compassion, and purity which kept the lustre of his private life
undimmed to the last.
My father formed a Normal School for our girls, called the
Native Ladies' Normal School. This school was at one time the
only institution of the kind in India. Today there are hundreds
of colleges and schools all over India for Indian girls and
women.
My father fought for female education. How keenly he was
opposed by the leading men at the time!
VICTORIA COLLEGE

Curiously enough, some of the men who spoke most strongly
against female education were the first to bring their wives out
of purdah; indeed, to my idea, they are now too English. Later
on my father established a college in Calcutta named after her
late Majesty Queen Victoria. This college will always be
associated with the name of Keshub Chunder Sen. He did not
believe in the importance of university degrees; he maintained
that for a woman to be a good wife and a good mother is far

better than to be able to write M.A. or B.A. after her name.
Therefore, only things likely to be useful to them were taught
to the girls who attended the Victoria College. Zenana ladies
also came to the lectures, and the good work flourished. I
always remember the name of Miss Pigot in connection with
the educational movement in India. She was the head of an
institution close to where we lived. One of the objects of this
institution was to train Christian Indian girls to visit Hindu
houses and give lessons to the women who wished to improve
their education. Miss Pigot also took charge of Hindu ladies
while their husbands were in England. She always showed the
greatest interest in our family, and called my grandmother
"Mother".
Miss Pigot is still alive; I am very fond of the dear old lady,
she has been a true friend to us all.
Sadhankanan was the name of the country house belonging
to my father, not far from Calcutta,
in which we lived later on. The house itself was small, but the
grounds were charming with their beautiful trees, flowers, and
fruit. There we lived an open·air life among the flowers by
which the air seemed always perfumed. I remember a curious
thing happening there which filled me with fresh admiration
for my father and helped to make me think he was more than
human. The gardens at Sadhankanan were full of snakes. As I
stood by a hedge of pineapple trees one day, I suddenly saw a
frog hopping at a tremendous pace in the direction of the
praying-ground where my father and his followers were
engaged in their devotions; it was chased by a snake. The frog
jumped straight on to my father's knees, and the pursuer,
stopping bewildered in front of his quarry, swayed to and fro
for a moment with his hood ominously raised, then turned and

glided away, greatly to my relief, whereupon the frog jumped
down from his sanctuary. "How wonderful he is!" I thought,
"the weakest thing would be safe with him," and indeed no
creature ever appealed to my father's pity in vain.
My mother loved Sadhankanan, and I remember how pretty
she used to look among those beautiful surroundings. She was
small, with tiny hands and feet and a wealth of dark hair, and
she had a lovely voice which was heard to the best advantage in
our hymns and Bengali songs. Mother's gentle influence kept
us very much together. She was a woman of strong convictions,
and would never countenance
THE FACE WITH A TOOTHLESS SMILE

anything which her conscience told her was wrong. She was a
charming story-teller, and would often tell us fairy tales when
we were in bed. We loved these stories and never wearied of
listening to them; some of them I have collected together in a
little volume, and one I will include here.
A Maharajah had two wives, and he loved the second far
more than the first. Yet the first wife was lovely, gentle,
unselfish, and kind-hearted, and the second was just the
reverse; she was haughty, vain, ill-tempered, and very jealous
of the first wife. The first wife had a baby boy, the heir, to
whom the Maharajah was very devoted, and much to the
annoyance of the second wife he often played with the baby,
who was just beginning to crawl. One day, while he was playing
with the child, he sang to him over and over again: "I love this
face with its toothless smile," and the second wife hearing,
could not get the expression out of her head, "toothless smile."
The next time the Maharajah came to see the second wife he

found her crawling on the floor, and thought she had gone
mad. He asked her what she was doing, and when she opened
her mouth to answer he saw, to his horror and disgust, that she
had no teeth. "What have you done to yourself?" he asked
angrily. She answered him with a hideous smile, "Did you not
say to your baby that you loved the face with a toothless
smile?" With a furious look he said, "Begone, you are no longer
my wife. Your insane jealousy banishes
you for ever from the palace;" and weeping and lamenting, she
was turned away.
My mother lived for my father and his beliefs. The world
never troubled her. "You cannot impede my work, for it is
God's work," were the words which formed the keynote of my
father's steadfast faith, and my mother accepted it with perfect
conviction. She never seemed distressed by her loss of caste,
although she was left out of many a family gathering in
consequence. I think my mother, however, sometimes pitied
us, for we shared her fate when festivities took place in the old
house, and she then made much of us in her gentle way. But
we led our lives secure in the belief that the religion practiced
by my father was the highest. His life and his teachings were so
beautiful that it was impossible not to try and live up to his
ideals, and his yoke was so light that we never felt it.
In the days of my youth, as well as at the present time, I
found the greatest consolation in religion. Not the fierce
fanaticism which scourges the trembling soul, riot the appeal
of beautiful music and gorgeous vestments which attract the
eye and drug the heart, but the simple and direct appeal to
God as a father and a friend, the close and perfect
understanding between the Creator and His creature ..
We children loved the religious services, and the

remembrance of my father's face as he prayed often comes
back to me. I have another vivid memory of those days:
sometimes, long before the servants

A SWEET AND SILENT HOUR

were awake, a beautiful voice filled the dawn with melody. It
was one of my father's missionaries who, alone upon the roof,
sang the praise of God in that sweet and silent hour. I can hear
the echo of his song even now. We children used to think that
we were very near to heaven then, and we secretly imagined
that the singer was an angel visitant.
We were kept quite apart from the world, and light talk and
unkind gossip were things unknown to us. Some of my readers
may think that I must have led a dull kind of life. Possibly I did
in the eyes of the world, but it was happiness to me. As for
clothes, we were content with our ordinary muslin saris, and
did not see the beauty of foreign goods.
We are very hospitable in the East. In our home, if
unexpected guests arrived, mother would say to us girls, if we
were at home in the holidays, "Go and take what is wanted out
of the store." One would cut the vegetables, and dear mother
would cook, and within a short time quite a good meal would
be prepared. There is such a nice word used in the Indian
housekeeping world, "bart-auta", which means "end to an
increase"; we never say: "there is none," or "it is finished." The
stores should never be empty, but the new supplies come in
before the old are finished.
I was always very much attached to my eldest brother,
Karuna. I called him "Dada" (elder brother); he and I were
great friends. I remember

that once a fine idea struck him. "Let's make soap," he said;
"everybody uses soap, and there is a lot of money in it. Sunity,
we will become very rich."
My youngest uncle (my mother's brother) was asked to be a
partner in the scheme, and we collected quantities of lime, oil,
and essences wherewith we thought to produce the ideal
cleanser. These we heaped anyhow into a frying-pan and began
to heat them up. But to our dismay we found something was
wrong. The smoke and flames nearly blinded us, and we were
forced to retreat and let the horrid mess burn itself out.
Coolootola was our playground, and I think if the walls
could have spoken to us they might have related some very
strange stories of the old doings at "Sen's House." I always felt
the rooms had histories, and I remember a certain staircase
which report said was haunted, and which was the scene of
two uncanny happenings when I was a child. Once when my
cousins were playing hide-and-seek, one of them seemed to be
held back by some unseen force as he ran down the staircase.
When at last he managed to shake off the terror which
possessed him, he fainted.
I was equally frightened at the same place, but in a different
way. My father always cooked his own breakfast, and it was a
great privilege to me in my holidays to be allowed to help him.
One day he had finished his breakfast, and I was bringing
THE HAUNTED STAIRCASE

away the curry which was left, and walking very carefully down
the staircase, my thoughts set on the dish I was holding, when

suddenly I had the impression that a whole army of cats was
after me. I looked back. There was nothing to be seen. I went
on, and again the feeling of being stealthily followed came over
me; I felt I was in the midst of furry, wicked-eyed creatures,
and almost heard their velvety paddings around me. I was
suffocated with the presence of cats, and dreaded the spring
which I felt every moment they would make. Shaking with
terror, I kept myself from dropping the dish only by a great
effort.
Once when we were playing, my sister Bino and I were left
on the roof. I was like a boy, and ran and jumped, and I said to
Bino, "I shall run down the stairs much faster than you can,
and you will be left alone in the middle of the haunted
staircase." Poor Bino looked alarmed, she was slim and
delicate; she began to run, but long before she reached the
terrace I got there and closed the door, expecting her to cry or
try to push the door, but nothing happened, and I got so
frightened I flung open the door. There was no Bino to be
found. I had a fright. I ran up and down the stairs several times
and searched the enormous roof above, but could not find her.
I felt something must have happened to Bino, as "the ghost
lives in the staircase." I cried a great deal, and then walked
slowly down to the bedroom verandah feeling miserable and
most
ashamed of myself. There I found Bino looking quite happy,
and instead of scolding me she said in her sweet way, "I went
downstairs when I found the door closed." It was a greater
punishment than if she had scolded me.
My brothers and sisters have all followed my father's
teachings throughout their lives. I am sure there is not one of
that happy band of children who played about "Sen's House"

who has not found the greatest comfort and support from our
upbringing. My eldest brother, in particular, was very religious,
and carried on my father's work, helped by his wife, who
copied many of my father's prayers and taught in the Victoria
College when it needed teachers.
My second brother, Nirmal, is a most amiable and
easygoing man. He is now in the India Office in London and
works hard for the welfare of Indian students in London, a
subject upon which he has very decided ideas. He is very
popular, always ready to help others, and is very happy in his
home life. He married a Miss Luddhi.
My third brother, Profullo, was wonderfully gifted. He was a
most affectionate little friend to me when I was a bride in the
big house in Calcutta, and was almost always with me. On
several occasions when I went to England with my children,
and my dear husband could not go, Profullo went instead and
managed everything. He was my children's favorite uncle.
PROFULLO AND THE ROSE

A wonderful thing happened to Profullo when he was a few
weeks old. He fell ill, and the doctors gave him up; at the time
my father was away at Belghuria garden-house, and the sad
news had to be sent to him. When at length my father arrived
everyone was weeping, thinking the boy was gone. My father
entered the room with a lovely rose in his hand, and they all
saw what a wonderful expression there was upon his face.
Father touched Profullo's face with the flower, and the boy
opened his eyes and said, "Father, have you come?" and from
that day he rapidly recovered. Profullo had several pet names,
Pepery, Peter, and Pip and Peroo.

He married an English girl. He was always a devoted
follower of my father's.
My husband used to say that my father's great gifts and
devoutness were inherited by my fourth brother, Saral. Every
one thought he would become a missionary. When he was a
small boy, he always said he would carry on my father's work.
He is unselfish, most kind-hearted and simple minded. His pet
name is Bhopal.
My youngest brother's name is Subrata, and his pet name is
Bhajan. He was my eldest son's best friend: the boy was
devoted to him and asked for him till the end. Subrata is now a
doctor, yet we still regard him as our baby brother, and I do not
think he will ever grow up; he behaves like a baby. He married
a pretty French girl and did well during
the War, although I am sorry to say he did not obtain a
permanent post.
My sisters are the dearest of women. The second, Savitri, is
quiet and retiring, with many good qualities. Her pet name is
Bino. She is a tall, handsome girl, the best of wives, and a very
good mother. She married a cousin of my husband's, and it has
been a great happiness and comfort to me to have her with me
all these years in Cooch Behar, where we have worked hand in
hand.
My third sister, Sucharu, is most unselfish, and her
experiences have made her more than usually sympathetic
with the sorrows of others. She was engaged when quite a girl
to the Maharajah of Mourbhanj, but his family came between
them and he married a Hindu girl.
My sister suffered for several years, as it is an unknown
thing for an Indian girl to be an "old maid," and we were
disappointed, annoyed, and distressed that such trouble had

befallen her. But my sister loved the Maharajah just the same
all through, and never said an unkind word. "It is my fate,
don't blame him," she said.
We tried to persuade her to marry, but nothing would
induce her to forget her lover. Fourteen years passed, during
which she was an angel in our house. Then she found her longdelayed happiness. The Maharajah's wife died, and he came
back to ask my sister to marry him. The marriage took place in
Calcutta, and for some time the Maharajah

THE HAPPIEST WOMAN IN THE WORLD

and my sister led the happiest of lives. But Fate, mysterious
Fate, ordained that Death, which had given them happiness,
should destroy it. The Maharajah was accidentally shot at a
shooting party, and my sister's life was darkened for ever.
She lives for her children and for her stepsons. Some
English ladies once said to me that they had no idea the
Maharajah had any children by his first marriage, as the whole
family seemed so united and devoted to the Maharani.
My fourth sister, Monica, who is very handsome, prayed
that luxury might never come into her life for fear the world
should make her forget God. We call her Moni; she has the
most happy, contented disposition imaginable. No one has
ever heard her utter an unkind word. She takes everything as it
comes, quietly and without complaint, and thinks herself the
happiest woman in the world. Her faith in God is wonderful.
She married a Professor in the Education Department, a very
clever man, whose name is Sadhu Mahalanobis.
Sujata, the youngest, has always made sunshine in our

midst. She is as sweet as some lovely flower, and I think her
one idea is to give every one as much pleasure as she can. She
was so pretty that when our present King as Prince of Wales
lunched with us he asked, "Who is that very pretty girl in the
sari?" Sujata married a Mr. Sen, brother of my fourth sister-inlaw.
How happy we were! I think that Providence
always gives us compensations for our sorrows. There are some
hours the glory of which triumphs over the darkness which
later clouds our lives: some loved voices whose sweet
remembrance deadens the sound of unkind tongues: some
faces that in our memory have always a loving smile.
I am happy and proud to say that my brothers and sisters
have always been most kind and loving to me.
I was not considered a pretty child, but I remember that a
great-uncle once said to my mother: "This little girl, Sunity,
will be somebody one day, for I see a lotus in her eyes." "I shall
have a handsome son-in-law," my mother laughingly replied,
and I was greatly amused. When I was twelve I thought I
would make a vow never to marry. My ambition was to be
clever, to travel a great deal, and to be a sort of nun. I asked a
school friend of mine named Kamari if she also would promise
not to marry. To my great disappointment she said: "It is too
hard a vow to take," but added affectionately, " we will try."
Once some of the nuns from Loretto Convent visited my
father's school, and one of them, looking at me gently, asked:
"Would you like to be a nun?" We frequently visited this
convent, and the kind nuns often came to see us. I admired
and loved those nuns.
Even now whenever I get an opportunity I go to see the
Convent Sisters.
