Chapter One
Grandfather Khadga
I was born in a place called Sagar, a small district town in the folds
of the Vindhya mountains of Madhya Pradesh in India. Madhya
Pradesh means 'the Central State'. In the days of the British this
part of India was known as 'the Central Provinces'. My home town
might justifiably claim to be the very navel of India. And yet, the
world I grew up in was not of India; it was more like a segment of
Nepal transplanted to the heartland of the Indian subcontinent: a
couple of hundred acres of sparsely forested hillside overlooking
the lake of Sagar, where the British had permitted my maternal
grandfather to put down his roots.
Khadga Samsher Jung Bahadur Rana was marked by destiny to
play a major role in the history of his country, Nepal. As it was, he
turned out to be one of its more awkward rejects, being only in his
mid-thirties when he was forced to flee Nepal and to seek asylum
in what was then the Raj. The British, ever indulgent to a scion of
the Ranas of Nepal in distress, readily obliged. All they asked for
was that he should not live in any of their provinces that bordered
Nepal and that he should refrain from consorting with the dozen or
so other Ranas who were also political refugees in India.
My grandfather eventually chose Sagar because the hills and the
jungles reminded him of his native land. Here he built a huge
mansion and created around himself a make-believe Nepal. Behind
the house the two horseshoes of servants' quarters were crammed
with retainers brought from Nepal. The language of the household

was Gurkhali, the language of Nepal. Although the gods in the
family shrine were the same

Page 4

gods that the Indians worshipped, the forms of our prayers, our
rituals and our festivals were those of Nepal. Even as he was
building the house, the people of Sagar had taken to calling it 'the
Nepal Palace', and that was the name that stuck.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
My only memory of my grandfather is of when he was about to be
taken to Benaras to die. As I was later to learn, he was the sort of
man who, rather than letting events overtake him, strove to shape
them to fit into his plans; if he found that he could not alter their
course he preferred to meet them halfway and on ground of his
own choosing. Now he had decided to meet death halfway, and in
Benaras, which, after all, was the proper place for Hindus to die
with their feet immersed in the sacred waters of the River Ganges
and the prayers of the priests ringing in their ears: 'Wasansi
jeernani yatha vihaya . . . even as we cast off old clothes, so does
the immortal soul abandon a worn out body.'
It is strange that I should remember the event at all, for I could not
have been much more than two years old. But the magnitude of the
crisis that had gripped our household must have made an
impression on my consciousness. I remember that, as I stood in the
doorway of his bedroom, my hands were fumbling with the
wooden catch which kept the door open. He had been transferred
from his bed into one of those reclining cane-bottomed chairs with
extendable arms, which were designed to prop your feet up and
were as much a feature of the Raj as solar topees or punkhas. He
was bundled up in a soft quilted cover, for it was one of those
crisply cold mornings of the Central Indian winter. As I watched,

fascinated but detached, four servants filed in, lifted the chair and
carried it deftly away. One was my own man-servant whom my
grandmother had allotted to me in addition to my three personal
maids.
I turned away from the vast, empty room, with its faint smell of
hookah tobacco and cough drops, and scampered onto the balcony
which overlooked the front porch. One of the servants held me up
so that I could see what was going on. Below me, drawn up near
the front steps, was what must have been one of the very first
motor cars in Sagar. Around the canvas-topped

Page 5

maroon tourer, with its bulb horn and gleaming brass lamps, stood
my uncles, their wives and children, relations by marriage,
dependants and servants.
For a long time, or so it seemed, nothing happened. They must, of
course, have been waiting for the precise moment worked out by
the family priests as being the most propitious for such a departure.
When that moment came, my grandfather was lifted tenderly out of
his chair and placed on the rear seat of the car beside my
grandmother. As the car began to move, those who were gathered
round it bowed, their hands folded in a last farewell to a man who,
for so many years, had formed the very centre of their world. They
were still bent, as though trying to hide their tears from my
grandmother's notice, when the car gathered speed and disappeared
among the trees beyond the tennis court.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
This picture of my grandfather as an inert bundle being taken away
to be transformed into a corpse could hardly be less fair to his
memory. Khadga Samsher was above all a Rana of Nepal. He
revelled in the dominance of his sex; he was a soldier and a hunter,
a strutting egocentric who, reputedly, felt more at home in the
saddle than the chair, attired in the gaudy uniform of an officer of
the Nepalese army.
He could not have been quite thirty years old when he had
contrived to make himself the army's Commander-in-Chief. The
coup had been both swift and bloody. My grandfather was known
to have committed at least one murder: he killed his uncle, Rana

Ranadip, the ruling Maharaja of Nepal. Two other members of the
Rana family, Jagat Jung and his son Judha Pratap, were also killed
that night, but whether by my grandfather or by his brother (and
fellow conspirator), Bir Samsher, was never conclusively
established.
My grandmother, fiercely loyal to her husband, could never bring
herself to think of these events as even remotely reprehensible. 'A
confrontation between two rival factions,' was how she put it. 'A
brave man seeking out and killing those enemies who were plotting
to do away with him. By the grace of God, your grandfather came
out the winner in that struggle. The entire army was on his side, the
army and the people of

Page 6

Nepal too. Otherwise the plot would never have succeeded, would
it? His was the right cause.'
Right or wrong, what my grandfather did on that night nearly a
hundred years ago provides a glimpse of the snake-pit of intrigue
and venom that the court of Nepal had become in the last quarter of
the nineteenth century.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
In those days the king of Nepal was, if anything, even more of a
figurehead than the 'constitutional' monarch of today. The real
power was wielded by the Maharaja of Nepal, who was also the
Prime Minister. It was he who was the absolute ruler of the country
and who, by an unalterable decree called a sanad, had been
invested with the power to 'appoint and dismiss all government
servants, declare war, make peace and sign treaties with foreign
powers, make new laws and repeal old ones'.
The supreme office of the Maharaja had been made hereditary, the
exclusive preserve of one family, the Ranas. Unusually, the
succession did not pass to the eldest son, but 'to the oldest
surviving male member of the generation . . . priority of birth being
the principal consideration between brother and cousin'.
This preposterous system of succession had been devised by
Maharaja Jung Bahadur, a man who is generally regarded as a sort
of colossus of the Rana clan and indeed of Nepal itself. In 1841 he
seized power by a military coup and then ruled his land with a
whip hand for the next thirty-six years. He managed to divest the
king of all power and banished him to a limbo or, as he chose to

describe it, 'a pinnacle of power from which he should never
descend to demean himself with the humdrum affairs of
administration'. Jung Bahadur fathered more than a dozen sons, of
whom at least ten were alive at the time of his death in 1877.
Before he had himself transported to the banks of the Bagmati
River in preparation for its advent, however, he passed on the reins
of office to his youngest brother, Ranadip. Ranadip's successor, of
course, would be whoever happened to be the most senior in the
next generation of the clan.
But the next generation was not prepared to sit back and

Page 7

await its turn. There were at least a score of Rana siblings who
believed that they had a fair chance of becoming the Maharaja of
Nepal. The most impatient among them was Jung Bahadur's eldest
son, Jagat Jung. A headstrong and crafty man who held the rank of
Major-General, he had always taken it for granted that he would
succeed his father, and he had strong allies among the senior
courtiers. His two principal rivals were the sons of Jung Bahadur's
brother, Dhir Samsher, Bir Samsher and his younger brother
Khadga Samsher, my maternal grandfather.
Jagat Jung was the first to act. He hatched a plot to exterminate
Rana Ranadip. But the plot was discovered and Jagat Jung was
banished to India. Twenty-one co-conspirators were ceremonially
beheaded. Several years later, however, in 1884, a curt
announcement from the Thapatali Palace declared that Ranadip had
granted a full pardon to his cousin. Jagat Jung returned to
Katmandu, and soon afterwards he was reinstated in the role of
succession.
While, to most outsiders, this appeared to be no more than an act of
misplaced magnanimity, the courtiers of Nepal were quick to read
the signs. Jagat Jung, in another bid to make himself master of
Nepal, had somehow managed to enlist the Maharaja himself on
his side. It was apparent that a new alignment of forces had taken
place, and its targets were the two young men whose names were
also high up in the list of succession, Bir Samsher and Khadga
Samsher.
In his book, Nepal the Home of the Gods, Sardar Ikbal Ali Shah
described the situation almost in the very words that my
grandmother used in describing it to me:

Gradually (Jagat Jung) assumed a position which spelt ill for Bir
Samsher and his brother . . . the enmity between the two branches of
the family was such that their very lives were endangered. The time
came when they had seriously to consider a situation which had
already passed beyond the intolerable, and they had to decide whether
they should quietly await the death which was being prepared for
them, or take action.

My grandmother, and others who knew the Samsher brothers well,
believed that, left to himself, Bir would have done nothing: 'He just
did not have the gumption. And even if he had, how could he have
gained entry into the Maharaja's

Page 8

private chambers?' my grandmother would ask.
'How could Grandfather?'
'For him it was easy. He was the English reader to the Court; he
opened all English letters and had them translated. All he had to
say was that he had an urgent message to deliver.'
So Bir Samsher was persuaded that unless they acted boldly they
would both be put to death. 'All you need to do is to stand beside
me,' Khadga is said to have told him, 'I'll do whatever is to be
done.'
The twenty-second of December 1885 was a cold but bright day,
my grandmother remembered: 'Overnight the mountains had crept
closer. Your grandfather had spent the morning at his brother's
house. Towards evening, he came home and told me that he was
about to go on a mission from which he might not return.' He
waited for night to fall before setting out again, putting on his
favourite 'British Warm' with deep pockets. He called for his
brother and together they went to the Prime Minister's palace.
According to my grandmother, whose account was, I am sure, more
authentic than the history books', her husband brushed past the
guards at the door, saying that he had an important letter from the
British Resident which needed immediate action. The brothers
were admitted into the bedchamber where Maharaja Ranadip was
having his legs massaged by a bevy of maidservants. He sat up in
bed and asked: 'Ke ho? (What is it?)'.
'Yeh!' Khadga told him as he pulled out his revolver and fired two
shots into him at pointblank range.

That night their cousin, Jagat Jung, and his son were also
murdered. Which brother was responsible was never revealed, but
in our house in Sagar it was always taken for granted that my
grandfather committed all three murders.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
The very next day Bir Samsher became the Maharaja of Nepal and
promptly appointed my grandfather as the Commander-in-Chief of
Nepal's army. Both the court and the army hierarchy seemed to
accept the new men at the top without demur. As for my
grandfather, he had achieved the goal of his life: to be the chief
soldier in a land that venerated the

Page 9

profession of arms. He loved uniforms, parades and martial music.
It was his ambition to modernize Nepal's army along British lines,
and he set about doing so with the single-minded zeal of a
schoolboy playing with toy soldiers.
'After all, if he had really wanted to make himself the Maharaja, he
could have so easily done so at the time of the coup or soon after,
couldn't he?' my grandmother would argue. 'As the Commander-inChief he was the most powerful man in Nepal and his officers and
men used to adore him.'
I myself have never questioned this. Khadga was now number two
in the line of succession and the Maharaja, whom he had, so to
speak, frog-marched into that position, was his meek and easygoing brother.
That was just the rub. Bir Samsher was a man without a will of his
own; like his predecessors in office, he had a domineering wife
with whom he was hopelessly infatuated. My grandmother, who
knew her and did not like her, thought her bold, crude and cunning.
'In the court she would openly taunt her husband that he was
nothing but a puppet ruler; that all Nepal knew that a leaf could not
stir without Khadga Samsher's orders. Oh, it did not take her long
to poison his mind, to make it appear that his brother was secretly
plotting to take over. Was not his absorption in the army itself proof
of such designs?'
Was it? Nepal's historians also seem to think that it was. On the
other hand, my grandfather's reactions should absolve him from
suspicion of any sinister designs. His was the reaction of a man
taken wholly by surprise, not of a plotter who could not have failed

to take the most elementary precautions against discovery and the
inevitable retribution. The schoolboy had been caught playing
truant and gamely accepted his chastisement.
A few months after his appointment, out of the blue, he was served
with a 'Red Flag Order'. A messenger came from the palace,
bearing a letter and a red flag and accompanied by a heavy military
escort. The letter had to be opened in front of the messenger and
instantly acted upon. Khadga's Order told him that he had been
removed from his post of Commander-in-Chief and banished to
Palpa, the westernmost province of Nepal. Palpa was at least two
hundred miles from

Page 10

the Katmandu valley, and the only road to it was a mule track.
Without hesitation he gave up his office and repaired to Palpa,
where he lived for the next two years, an exuberant, restless man of
action, consigned to a limbo and watched over by teams of
informers. Whether the Maharaja was shamed by the dignity and
decorum of his brother's conduct, or regretted his harshness
towards the man who, after all, had made him the Maharaja of
Nepal, two years later he relented. In the autumn of 1887 he
appointed Khadga Governor of the Palpa province.
If this was something of a comedown from being head of Nepal's
army, at least it showed that he was back in favour. Since the
Maharaja himself had served as Governor of Palpa a few years
earlier, surely it would not be long before he was restored to his
rightful position as heir apparent?
Meanwhile, there were compensations. As the Governor, he would
have a small garrison under his command and could once again
play at soldiers to his heart's content. He pounced on this force,
which could have been hardly more than a battalion in strength. He
drilled them, smartened up their uniforms, assembled a band for
them and put them through manoeuvres. The ever-watchful
informers took note and made reports. In Katmandu, a week's
distance away by fast runners acting in relays, these reports
sparked old fears. Khadga was up to his tricks again. All this hectic
military activity could have only one purpose: mutiny.
Such was the official view, and it was almost inevitable that it
should be reflected in the history books of the times, which were
sponsored by the reigning maharajas.

Within days, over the dizzy mountain tracks fanning out from the
capital, came another dreaded Red Flag Order. My grandfather was
banished from Nepal and his name was removed from the list of
succession. A number of others who were said to have been
implicated in the plot were put to death.
If Khadga had really organized a mutiny, surely, with enough
troops under his command to overcome the escort that had
accompanied the Red Flag messenger, he could have defied the
order? But this time, too, he obeyed with alacrity and that very day,
or the next, headed for India.
Far from turning his back on Nepal, he was convinced that

Page 11

his exile was no more than a phase and that he would be back again
as Maharaja of Nepal after his brother's death. That he was to be
the Maharaja was something pre-ordained, written by the moving
finger of Pashupatinath, Katmandu's presiding deity. For Rana
Khadga Samsher had in his possession the Gajmani.
The Gajmani was not a pearl; it looked like a pearl, with both the
sheen and the translucence of nacre but it was, in fact, an ovalshaped piece of bone the size of a pigeon's egg. It had been found
embedded in the forehead of Nepal's legendary eighteenth-century
elephant, Gajaraj, who was said to have been twelve feet tall.
Today you can see his enormous skull in the Royal Museum at
Katmandu, with a hole the size of a cricket ball right in the middle
of the forehead where the stone had been hacked out.
This great unnatural pearl the Ranas believed was some sort of a
diabolical talisman, which could bring either good or bad luck,
make its possessor rich and powerful or cause his ruin. Khadga
Samsher never doubted that it would bring him anything but good
luck; indeed, that it would make him the master of Nepal. But how
he came to acquire the Gajmani is his own secret; if he told it to my
grandmother, she for her part never revealed it. It had been one of
Jung Bahadur's most prized possessions before he had passed it on
to his eldest son, Jagat Jung. Had my grandfather, when he (or his
brother) murdered Jagat Jung, taken it from the shrine where it was
kept as an object of daily worship? The fact that he had chosen to
take it out with him in his saddlebag as he fled to India shows how
much store he had set by it.
After he left, it took my grandmother months of agonizing
entreaties to her brother-in-law to be given permission to follow

her husband into exile. As soon as it was given she lost little time
in making tracks for India, taking with her her children, dependants
and servants. Her husband had, in the meantime, bought an estate
outside Dehra Dun in the Himalayan foothills, not more than a
day's march from Nepal's borders. Thither my grandmother
travelled over the fern-filled goat tracks crawling with leeches, in a
mile-long caravan of mules and palanquins carried by a hundred or
so bearers. In the upholstery of these palanquins she somehow

Page 12

managed to secrete much more of the family's gold, jewellery and
other valuables than her permit entitled her to take out of the
country. Practical above all, she had confined her selection strictly
to whatever was most valuable.
For my grandfather Dehra Dun should have been a sort of paradise.
The jungles surrounding it were teeming with game, and here he
could indulge his passion for hunting to his heart's content. What
was more, Dehra Dun also sheltered two other Rana families who
had been expelled from nepal as a consequence of earlier struggles
for power. Here my grandparents could talk about the past,
compare notes and exchange gossip in their own language, even
share their dreams.
But it took them years to settle down. The spell of Nepal held
them, and they believed it was their destiny to return. Any day
now, another Red Flag Order would come, this time recalling my
grandfather to take his rightful place in the Rana hierarchy.
It was not until a new century had dawned and, almost coinciding
with it, drastic changes occurred in Nepal, that my grandparents
freed themselves from the spell of Nepal. Maharaja Bir Samsher
died, and his place was taken by Khadga's younger brother Deva
Samsher. It was a measure of my grandfather's acceptance of his lot
that he sent an exuberant message to the new Maharaja, praising
him and wishing him well.
Deva Samsher, however, was fated not to rule long. Within a
couple of months of his accession, Nepal saw something of a repeat
performance of my grandfather's coup. Yet another of his numerous

younger brothers, Chandra Samsher, forced Deva to abdicate at the
point of a gun, and made himself Maharaja.
Deva, an educated man who spoke English well and was
enamoured of Western society, chose the hill resort of Mussoorie,
famous for its cosmopolitan gaiety and licence. But Mussoorie is
barely a dozen miles from Dehra Dun, and what was to prevent that
arch-intriguer, Khadga Samsher, from enlisting his brother's help in
hatching yet another of his infernal plots to become the Maharaja
of Nepal?
Khadga had to be shifted to somewhere well away from

Page 13

Benaras or Dehra Dun, where the Ranas in exile had tended to
congregate. Chandra Samsher therefore sent emissaries to Calcutta
to wait upon the Viceroy. Lord Curzon was at the time hatching his
own plot to bring off an invasion of Nepal's northern neighbour,
Tibet. He was more than anxious to maintain amicable relations
with whoever was in power in Nepal, and readily cooperated.
So, in the winter of 1902, another peremptory message was brought
to Khadga Samsher, this time not by a Red Flag messenger but by a
polished civil servant of the Raj, who carried with him a polite but
firm request from the Indian Government to remove himself more
towards the centre of the subcontinent. He was assured that the
administrators of the Raj would give him all possible help in
choosing his place of residence.
Having been uprooted from Dehra Dun, my grandparents
eventually settled down in Sagar, where they lived happily for the
next twenty years. Here they made a new beginning, raised their
children and made friends. Thanks largely to the risks my
grandmother had run in bringing the extra trinkets out of Nepal,
they were in a position to lead a low-key princely life. Until that
day in November 1921, when another sort of Red Flag Order
arrived; this time from death itself. And, as on the two previous
occasions, my grandfather hastened to obey.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
I shall finish the story of the Gajmani here. After my grandfather
had become reconciled to the fact that he would never see Nepal
again, he had the stone set into a brooch in the shape of a peacock

with a fanned-out tail, the stone forming the chest and the tail made
by emeralds and diamonds. My grandmother wore it on festive
occasions. On my grandmother's death, the precious stones were
shared out among her sons, the Gajmani itself went to my uncle
Hem Samsher. He died at a somewhat early age and his daughter,
Khem-devi, inherited it. After her husband's retirement from the
army he became the manager of an apple orchard I had acquired in
the Himalayas. He died while still in his fifties, and I remember
Khem coming to me in tears and almost literally throwing the stone
in my lap. She believed the Gajmani had brought her

Page 14

and her father nothing but bad luck. Being superstitious myself, I
did not want to keep a fetish of such unpredictable properties. I
therefore offered it to my husband's Bombay jeweller, Nanubhai,
who since it had no intrinsic value bought it for the equivalent of
£150. In 1967, on a visit to Nepal as a guest of King Mahendra, I
saw the elephant's skull in the museum. Thinking it best that the
Gajmani should return to where it originally came from, I bought it
back from Nanubhai, who was glad to sell it to me for exactly the
price he had paid for it. I then sent the Gajmani as a present to King
Mahendra. Judging by the eminence he has acquired in Nepal's
affairs, I can only surmise that it has served His Majesty well. It is
displayed in the National Museum of Nepal in Kathmandu.

Chapter Two
I Become a Ward
The Ranas were originally Rajputs from India who had invaded
Nepal and eventually become its rulers. They were also orthodox
Hindus who, for nearly two centuries, had lived among a people
who were, for the most part, Buddhists. Inevitably, to their own
special stock of superstitions, taboos and prejudices, they had
added those of the people of Nepal.
My maternal grandmother was, of course, steeped in this culture.
And yet she must have possessed a streak of rugged independence
because, as soon as she became settled in her new environment, she
began to shed some of the more oppressive restraints of the old.
For her models she had the wives of the British officials of Sagar
the same gossipy women whom a young British subaltern named
Winston Churchill had dismissed as 'nasty vulgar creatures'. To her
they must have seemed exquisitely self-assured and emancipated.
It was my grandfather who ruled the household; indeed, he was
regarded as something of a tyrant by his sons and daughters, my
uncles and aunts. And yet he made a valiant effort to fit his family
into the new social order in which he found himself. He
encouraged his wife to go riding along the shaded cantonment
roads, side-saddle and dressed, like Sagar's memsahibs, in green or
plum-coloured velvet habits. She also was given piano lessons and
taught to sing English songs. I remember her at her piano in the
upstairs reception room, the afternoon sunlight slanting through the

open windows and making the carpets glint. She was thumping out
a tune with fierce concentration and singing in a slightly

Page 16

trembly voice, which may well have been in imitation of some
memsahibs's:
'Darling, I am growing old, silver threads among the gold.'

Of course, she did not have golden hair; it was jet black. But then
she had no idea what the words of the song meant; she knew no
English, even though she had taught herself to sign her name in it.
The Ranas scoffed at book learning. Until the last quarter of the
nineteenth century, there was not a single school in the whole of
their kingdom. The male offspring, such as my grandfather, were
given a rudimentary education and, on the whole, taught to speak
English by family tutors recruited from Bengal. But such education
as there was was a male privilege, and the general attitude towards
literacy was one of disapproval mixed with contempt, as bearing
the taint of such non-martial classes of Nepalese society as priests
or shopkeepers. The very thought of educating a Rana girl would
have sent shockwaves through the clan councils. Who would ever
marry such an oddity when, as it was, they were finding it
necessary to send scouts ever deeper into India to look for
bridegrooms of the requisite lineage and to agree to extortionate
dowries!
That my mother should have received any education at all in the
teeth of such prejudice must be ascribed to the influence of the
memsahibs of Sagar upon my grandmother. To her they represented
both glamour and emancipation. She was resolved not to let her
daughter grow up with the handicaps she herself had suffered. My
grandfather, for all his reputation for sternness, must have given in
with good grace, only stipulating that their daughter should not be

sent to the local school, for that too would have been an outrage
against his idea of decorum. So my grandmother employed a set of
private tutors at home. My mother became the very first Nepalese
girl to pass the matriculation examination. This achievement was
duly acknowledged by her uncle, Chandra Samsher, Maharaja of
Nepal, by the grant of a special prize of Rs 1000, a sum which in
those days represented princely munificence.
Over the years the two brothers had patched up their differences, or
at least had come to terms with the realities of

Page 17

their situations. Khadga sent reassurances to his brother that he
never had any thought of ousting him from his position. Chandra,
for his part, could afford to be magnanimous. In 1909, during an
official visit made by Chandra Semsher to Calcutta, then capital of
India, he invited his brother to a meeting. After they had embraced
each other, Khadga explained that he wanted nothing more than to
be allowed to live out his days in Sagar as a country gentleman. He
wished his brother well in all that he was doing to modernize
Nepal. Chandra then bestowed on Khadga the title of His Highness
and Raja and, what must have been even more welcome, settled on
him a generous pension.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
My mother was keen to continue her studies in college. She was a
strong-willed person, and also happened to be her father's
favourite. She wore down her parents' opposition and secured
admission to the Isabella Thoburn Women's College in Lucknow.
Since there was no question of a Rana living in a women's hostel
which was open to all castes, creeds and social backgrounds, a
pleasant bungalow was rented for her near the college, staffed with
Sagar servants.
Colleges in India open after the summer vacation in mid-June.
Barely had my mother settled into her new routine when Lucknow
was deluged by one of the worst floods in its history. The normally
placid River Gomati broke its banks and raced through the lowlying areas. Its waters entered my mother's bungalow and swept
away most of her belongings; she herself had to be carried pick-aback by one of her servants to safety. She returned to Sagar in

something of a daze. Her parents took the floods as an
unmistakable warning from the gods against an outrageous
violation of the proprieties. Then, with renewed fervour, they set
about doing what their daughter's absurd passion for studies had
prevented: finding a husband for her.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
The year was 1917. The First World War was entering its fourth
and darkest year. There must have been more than a dozen Rana
families living in exile in various parts of India. Most of them were
still very rich, and nearly all had numerous

Page 18

daughters. Because of their severed connections from the land of
their birth, the daughters had to be found husbands from among the
Rana connections in India, and these were restricted to the few
Rajput clans from which they themselves had sprung. The most
desirable grooms, of course, were the sons of Rajput princes or of
rich landowners. They proved not to be particularly difficult to
snare: Rana girls were proverbially good looking, with dark,
dancing almond-shaped eyes and glowing petal-smooth
complexions; and the Ranas were well known to be generous with
dowries.
But it was this class which formed the entrenched rearguard of
feudal privileges, in particular of multiple marriages for men and of
the seclusion in purdah for women. There were even said to be a
few who secretly regretted the banning of sati, the practice of
widow-burning. Any Rajput prince who did not possess half a
dozen legal wives and at least as many concubines would have
been regarded by his peers as something of an eccentric or, worse,
too impoverished to afford a properly-stocked harem or even, the
ultimate insult, lacking in manly vigour. On the other hand, if any
one of their wives or concubines were to allow herself to be seen in
public she would have been at once branded as a shameless hussy
who had violated the hallowed traditions of her class.
My grandparents seem to have been determined not to consign
their educated daughter to living in some sealed-off apartment in a
prince's palace. Instead, they would find her a husband from a
respectable family, capable of earning a decent living someone, in
fact, who came closest to the official élite of Sagar.
As was customary among the Rana families in exile, the search was

entrusted to middlemen from the priestly caste. Before long they
turned up with the name of a young man who exactly answered my
grandmother's requirements. Thakur Mahendra Singh came from a
respectable Rajput family with a lineage uncontaminated by
misalliances. Tall, handsome and in good health, he was also
something of a physical fitness faddist: a wrestler and the possessor
of a splendid torso of rippling muscles. He was a university
graduate and held a job as Deputy Collector in one of the highest
paid government services.

Page 19

It is not easy in the permissive social climate of today to come to
terms with the prevailing attitudes of the first quarter of this
century. If my grandparents had broken a minor taboo of their Rana
past, their daughter displayed a mystifyingly primitive response.
Once they had shown her a photograph of her chosen husband-tobe, she not only approved but also, almost in imitation of the
heroine of some mythological romance, at once considered herself
irrevocably affianced to him.
Cheered by her acceptance, they proceeded to seal the engagement
with the proper exchange of gifts, and the preparations for the
wedding were set in motion. It was then that they discovered that
the young man was already married, with a wife still living and in
excellent health. My grandfather was furious. Then and there he
would have broken off the negotiations had he not found that his
daughter was wholly against such a step. She revealed that she had
already accepted Mahendra Singh as her husband and that, as a
properly brought up Hindu girl, she would never tolerate the
thought of replacing his image with another's. If she could not
marry him, she would remain unmarried all her life. Even my
grandfather's much-feared temper was of no avail against her
obduracy.
So my grandparents gave in. The horoscopes of the bride and
bridegroom were scanned by astrologers and pronounced to be
complementary, and the marriage took place. But either the
horoscopes had been carelessly read or there had been collusion to
conceal the fact that they were wholly unmatched. The stars that
governed their lives were so locked in hostile positions that any
union was bound to be short-lived. It was my mother, able to read

Sanskrit script, who made this shocking discovery. But by then it
was too late: she was already married and with child.
My mother's careful reading of the two horoscopes turned up the
further prediction that she would give birth to a daughter and
within a few days of that event would die. So convinced was she of
the inevitability of these prophesies that, when she went to Sagar
for her delivery, she took her jewellery, as well as other portable
valuables such as gold and silver goblets and plate, with her. These
were to be left to her unborn

Page 20

daughter, a nest-egg to take care of her upbringing and dowry.
Her confinement took place in the annexe of one of the several
bungalows in the cantonment which my grandfather owned. This
was where I was born on 12 October 1919. Nine days later my
mother died.
After this there followed one of those family conflicts which have
tended to blight my life. Luckily this time I was too young to know
what was happening. My father wanted to take me to his house to
be brought up, but my grandfather feared that my stepmother
would ill-treat me and refused to part with me. Although my father
went to court, he did not bargain for my grandfather's
gamesmanship. He made out a case that my father was only
interested in laying his hands on the jewellery and other valuables
that my mother had left to me. Made to look like someone capable
of robbing his own infant daughter, my father wisely capitulated.
The case was settled by a consent decree. My grandparents could
keep me with them until I was seven years old, provided they laid
no claim to my legacy. After that I would have to go and live in my
father's house. A crisis had been averted; and who could say what
would happen at the end of seven years!
That was how, long before I was aware of it, I became a ward of
my grandparents. Two years later my grandfather died. It was my
grandmother who brought me up.

Page 21
